name,about,symptoms,treatment
AIDS-Associated-tumours,"AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by HIV (Human immunodeficiency virus) attacks the body's immune system. In AIDS, the body can no longer fight off disease successfully. As a result, certain cancers, infections, diseases of the nervous system and muscles occur more easily in individuals infected with HIV compared to healthy people. Cancers seen more frequently in AIDS include Kaposi's sarcoma, lymphomas, cancers of the cervix and the anus. Kapsoi's sarcoma often manifests itself as raised purplish-red bumps on the skin. These bumps can vary greatly in size. Lymph nodes, the intestines and the lungs can also be affected. In fact, any part of the body can be affected by this tumour. Several kinds of lymphomas can occur including those which involve the brain exclusively.","The symptoms of AIDS-associated cancers relate to the affected organs like the skin, internal organs of the body, or the lymphatic system.",Treatment for AIDS-associated cancers include:
Appendicitis,Appendicitis is an inflammation of the appendix which is a worm like organ in the gut situated just below where the small bowel opens in to the large bowel. It is caused by bacterial infection from the intestinal contents.,"The main symptom is pain in the abdomen, which classically begins around the umbilicus and soon settles in the right lower quadrant, just above the groin. This is associated with ill health, like fever that can be high and associated with sickly feeling and vomiting. The area above the right groin will be very tender and the patient will object to touching the area; if left unrecognised the inflammation spreads to the overlying covering called peritoneum, causing generalised tenderness and pressing on the left side causes pain at the site of appendix. Not infrequently appendicitis starts slowly as vague pains coming and going, and can be difficult to diagnose. It also can be very serious as the swollen organ can burst with the pressure inside, causing perforation and peritonitis, which are serious complications.","It is important that a doctor in the local hospital is consulted. Appropriate antibiotics are routinely used and when the patient settles he would need surgery, which is the corrective treatment. Surgery depends upon the seriousness of the patent’s presentation; i.e., if the patient shows signs of perforation he/she would need intensive therapy with antibiotics to help settle the condition and surgery carried out at a later date electively. Recently endoscopic surgery is being carried out at most hospital centres, but conventional procedure is still used universally."
Animal-bites,An injury that results when flesh is caught between the teeth of an animal that leads to: Superficial skin breaks with or without bleeding. Puncture wounds. Major lacerations.,"localized redness around your wound , warmth around the bite area,red streaks leading away from the bite ,a fever ,pus ,swelling ,pain","The doctor observes the bite for signs of infection - increasing skin redness, swelling and pain. He also examines the wound for possible nerve or tendon damage or bone injury. He cleans the wound with an antiseptic solution and removes any damaged tissues. He may prescribe an antibiotic to prevent infection and give the patient an injection to protect against tetanus. In all cases of animal bites a physician should be consulted to see whether in the circumstances of the case one should receive prophylaxis against rabies."
Anal-fissure,It is a painful crack in the internal lining of anus. This condition is common in all age groups. It is not a cancer.,Passing stool is very painful and this pain may persist. Occasionally there is bright red bleeding that may stain the stool or come in drops.,"Some fissures get better without any special treatment. However, most require treatment, as it is a very painful condition. Steroid ointments, painkillers, local anaesthetic creams and warm baths relieve pain but do not help in healing. Nitroglycerin (0.2%) applied locally twice daily every day for 6 weeks will cure about 70% of these fissures. This ointment is very difficult to obtain in India. The side effects of this ointment application include troublesome headaches and even faintness. Quick healing can be achieved by partially dividing the anal sphincteric muscle, but this requires an operation. Anal dilatation is a rather crude method of overcoming spasm of the anal sphincter and this may result in complete damage to the sphincter especially in women."
Arthritis,"Most people above the age of 50 start developing wear-and-tear of the various joints in the body with breakdown of the cartilage cushion in the joints. This causes the bones in the joints to become rough. This condition is known as osteoarthritis and mainly affects the weight-bearing joints like the knees, the hips and the joints in the vertebral column (mainly in the neck and the lower back). The joints that may have had injuries at a younger age are especially prone to develop osteoarthritis. There is also a familial form that affects the hands. Osteoarthritis is seen much more often in women than in men, especially its familial form. Fortunately, osteoarthritis is a disease only limited to the joints and does not involve the rest of the body. Also, inflammation is not a major feature of osteoarthritis. Thus, osteoarthritis may be classified as chronic non-inflammatory arthritis mainly related to aging and wear-and-tear. Because it is mainly a mechanical disease and not a systemic inflammatory disease, it is not a life threatening disease. The other older age joint disease, seen almost exclusively in men is gout. Gout is almost never seen below 40 years of age. It is also almost never seen in young women (before the onset of menopause, unless there is a known underlying kidney disease) and never seen in children. It is traditionally associated with affluent and rich men who usually have a strong family history of obesity, heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes mellitus and high blood lipids (high cholesterol etc.). They eat and drink well. They are usually obese. They do not exercise and have a propensity to develop the diseases mentioned above. Gout is the commonest inflammatory arthritis of adult men in the world. It usually appears suddenly with acute red-hot exquisitely painful swelling of the joint at the base of the big toe. It is caused by the presence of crystals of a chemical substance called uric acid (urate crystals) that seems to be increased in such individuals. The cause of increased uric acid is both familial as well as related to the specific life-style mentioned above. It is especially relevant to India for, a large segment of urban population of the newly rich, is rapidly acquiring such a life-style.","Joint pain, stiffness, and swelling are the most common symptoms of arthritis. Your range of motion may also decrease, and you may experience redness of the skin around the joint. Many people with arthritis notice their symptoms are worse in the morning.","As arthritis is not a single disease, treatment differs depending upon its type. However, the common goal of treatment is to keep the joints moving properly by relieving the pain and stiffness and by reducing swelling. In general, simple pain relievers like paracetamol, tramadol, and more ‘strong’ drugs called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs e.g. aspirin, ibuprofen, indomethacin, diclophenac, naproxen, aceclofenac, piroxicam, meloxicam, and the newer drugs like celecoxib, etoricoxib) are often used for short periods, especially in acute cases, early stages and in minor forms of arthritis. NSAIDs should never be used continuously daily over prolonged periods because they are very toxic and have a large number of serious side-effects. In severe systemic forms of crippling and often life-threatening arthritides (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus and others in this group) a special group of medicines called ‘disease modifying drugs’ (DMARDs) are given. These drugs have been proven to be highly effective, with good safety margin especially if given under the supervision of a rheumatologist who is well trained in their use. The newer DMARDs include methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, sulfasalazine, and leflunomide. The older ones included gold-salts, D-penicillamine and chloroquine. The newer DMARDs are highly effective in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and other severe systemic life-threatening forms of arthritis. But, these drugs are required to be usually given continuously for prolonged periods under the supervision of rheumatologist; often life-time. There is a third category of drugs sometimes used in severe serious forms of arthritis called immunosuppressive drugs. This category includes cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, and azathioprine. Another category of medicine that is often used in some types of arthritis is called glucocorticoid (commonly called ‘steroids’ or corticosteroids). These are ‘adjunct drugs’ that are always used in combination with DMARDs during the early stage of the initiation of DMARD-treatment only for a short period of time till the slow-acting DMARDs start taking full effect. Glucocorticoids are also highly effective in some of the life-threatening serious forms of arthritis (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic vasculitis etc.) where they are used as ‘emergency life saving drugs’. ‘Depot-preparations’ of glucocorticoids are also very useful and effective in controlling inflammation in joints when given as intra-articular injections. In fact, this method of treatment is highly effective and safe for patients who may have only a few inflamed joints. On the other hand, if a joint needs repeated injections of depot-preparations of glucocorticoids giving only temporary relief, a specialist must be consulted for proper treatment. Glucocorticoids should also never be given as ‘stand-alone’ drugs for arthritis and they should never be given as daily dose for prolonged periods of time, especially so without supervision of a rheumatologist. If not used appropriately, glucocorticoids can cause serious side effects. The latest category of drugs for serious systemic life threatening forms of arthritis (namely rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthritis-ankylosing spondylitis, diffuse connective tissue diseases, systemic vasculitides) are called biological response modifiers (BRMs) or simply ‘biologicals’. These are highly effective drugs that are changing the outcome in these serious crippling life threatening diseases of young men and women dramatically. Infliximab (‘Remicade’®), etanercept (‘Enbrel’®) and rituximab (‘Mabthera’®) are already available in India. Adalimumab (‘Humira’®), abatacept (‘Orancia’®) are likely to become available in India in the near future. However, presently their price is beyond the reach of common man (a single dose may cost more than 1 lakh rupees). Also, these drugs must be given only by specialist rheumatologist with precautions to prevent adverse effects. Controlling the weight AND REDUCING will reduce strain on weight-bearing joints. Exercise and physiotherapy help in keeping the muscles strong and movement of the joints as normal as possible. Proper occupational therapy would prevent further damage, maintain muscle power and help in coping with the functions of daily living. Severely damaged hips and knees may need to be surgically replaced by specialist orthopaedic surgeons. That is the stage at which the consultation with Orthopaedic specialists is required. Specific treatment for the commonest form of arthritis i.e. osteoarthritis (the arthritis of ‘joint aging’), is fairly simple in the early stages. Weight reduction, avoiding activities and posture that further damage the joint, regular exercises to build up the muscles that support the involved joints (under the guidance of a trained physiotherapist), and the occasional use of simple anti-inflammatory drugs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, mentioned above) prescribed by a physician, is all that is required. In advanced cases joint replacement surgery is a fairly safe and highly effective method of treatment with excellent long-term results.Rheumatoid arthritis and other systemic inflammatory arthritides like psoriatic arthritis and arthritis related to diffuse collagen diseases need the expertise of rheumatologists for prolonged, intense, and specialized form of treatment with disease modifying drugs (mentioned above). Ignoring or delaying appropriate consultations and treatment may lead to serious complications. The same is true of juvenile chronic arthritis seen in childhood and juveniles. Joint infections are acute rheumatological emergencies. They require prompt diagnosis and appropriate antibiotic and surgical treatment including drainage of pus from the joints. Any delay may lead to permanent damage. Treatment of gout needs special mention because the disease is preventable. Although the tendency to develop gout is hereditary, there are several life-style related factors that predispose the person to attacks of gouty arthritis. These include sedentary habits, lack of exercise, obesity, excess food intake especially of rich refined, high-calorie food including sea-food, a lot of red meat, some forms of alcoholic drinks especially beer, fermented food (that contain yeast e.g. ‘Mughlai food’). An acute attack is usually precipitated after a late-night party with a lot of eating and drinking, or sometimes after an injury or any other stress like surgery, or infection. Thus, in persons with a family history of gout, a diet restricted in calories, with lots of fruits and salads (high in soluble as well as insoluble fibres), complete avoidance of sea-food, red meat and fermented food, regular exercise to keep the weight under control, abstinence from alcoholic drinks (especially beer), prevents attacks of gout. This would also prevent the other diseases often associated with gout such as, high blood pressure, abnormalities of blood lipids (including high ‘bad’ cholesterol [LDL-cholesterol], and high triglycerides) that may lead to heart attack and stroke, and diabetes. Certain drugs (e.g. diuretics for the treatment of fluid retention) also predispose to gouty attacks. However, if despite these restrictions the person gets an acute attack of gout; it must be considered a rheumatological emergency. Urgent consultation with a rheumatologist is necessary. Strong non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and local injection of depot-preparation of glucocorticoids into the joint bring about immediate and dramatic relief. An important point to remember is to avoid a drug called allopurinol, which is the standard drug for preventing accumulation of uric acid in the body of persons with a tendency to develop gout. Giving this drug for in the early stages of an up-coming acute attack of gout will rapidly worsen the condition."
Abnormal-vaginal-bleeding,"The uterus bleeds in regular cycles called the menstrual cycles that last for 3-5 days. Menstruation occurs once every month although the cycle may vary from 21-35 days. These cyclical bleeds are triggered by a fall in the oestrogen (female sex hormones) levels in the blood.Vaginal bleeding may become abnormally excessive, scanty, or irregular. All of these need evaluation because they indicate disease.","Patients may complain of irregular periods. The cycles may have become shortened. Excessive bleeding may occur between two menstrual periods or the menstrual period itself may be profuse, or last longer than normal. Excessive bleeding may be associated with anaemia. The patients become pale, and tire easily. Those with tuberculosis or cancer may have loss of weight.","The treatment of abnormal vaginal bleeding depends on the underlying cause. Medicines are needed for DUB, which is usually treated with the hormone progesterone (another female sex hormone), or a hormone-like drug,Danazol. Fibroids are treated by operation in which either only the fibroid is removed (myomectomy) or the uterus is removed hysterectomy). Hysterectomy is preferred in patients who are not keen to have more children. Anaemia is commonly present in patients with excessive bleeding, and need supplementation with iron rich foods such as meat."
Allergic-conjunctivitis,Allergic conjunctivitis is an allergic reaction on the surface of the eyes. It is a very common condition that occurs when your eyes come in contact with allergy-causing substances (allergens). Pollen and smoke are examples of allergens.,"The eyes are itchy, watery and red. Sometimes the eyes may be swollen. Both eyes are affected unless just one eye came into contact with the allergen, as might happen with some drug allergies.","The first choice for treatment is to avoid the cause of allergy. Some people need to take antihistamine tablets, especially if they have other allergy symptoms. If you have only eye symptoms, eye drops may be the only medication required. These eye drops have anti-inflammatory, decongestant and anti-histamine properties. In the acute phase however, steroid drops may be needed for short periods of time, under medical supervision. If exposure to an allergen is anticipated, mast cell stabilizing drops like sodium cromoglycate orketotifen can help in prevention."
Anxiety,"Anxiety is the feeling of uneasiness, fear and insecurity when in reality there is nothing to be afraid of. Fear normally disappears after the danger is gone, but anxiety persists without any apparent danger. Fear, or mild anticipatory anxiety is normal emotion, leading to adaptive behaviour. But when the fear-provoking situation becomes long-standing, it causes harm to the body. Long lasting anxiety becomes stressful for the body, leading to medical problems when it is persistent and interferes with normal daily activities or harms physical health.","The symptoms include flushing, sweating, shortness of breath, rapid breathing or a feeling of choking. There could be trembling, frequent urination, dry mouth, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea or constipation. Tension, inability to relax, irritability, difficulty in concentrating, sleeplessness or sexual difficulties may also occur.","The doctor will treat any underlying disease. Alcohol, coffee and cola drinks should be avoided. The doctor may prescribe medicines to reduce anxiety. Psychotherapy may help to cope with the situation. Relaxation techniques, meditation and yoga help to reduce the anxiety. Getting enough rest during the day, as well as a good night’s sleep can help."
Agoraphobia,"Agoraphobia is an anxiety disorder. The people with agoraphobia avoid being in certain places or situations. They are afraid about having no way to escape or be overwhelmed with panic and having no help. An intense fear of driving, flying, crossing bridges, or being in shops are examples. The patients may become afraid of their reactions to these situations and this fear in itself can be disabling. In extreme cases, the agoraphobic person may never leave home. Agoraphobia is often the end stage of panic disorder. Panic disorder is characterized by severe frequent panic attacks marked by a sense of impending doom. A person may be called agoraphobic when he/she tries to avoid situations, which he/she feels might trigger a panic attack.","Agoraphobia may be the cause if a person often avoids going to places or doing things because of the fear of having no way to escape. Typical symptoms of panic attack may be: Palpitations or suddenly fast heartbeat Sweating even when it is not hot Trembling or shaking Shortness of breath, feeling of not getting enough air Feeling of choking or chest pain Nausea Dizziness Fear of going crazy, losing control of body functions or of dying Numbness or detachment Chills or hot flashes.Panic attacks may occur several times a day, or the attacks may be scattered, occurring only occasionally. Even occasional attacks can lead to fear of returning to a place or doing something associated with a past attack. A panic attack may last 10-15 minutes, or longer, after which the person may be exhausted.Women Women have agoraphobia two to four times more often than men. The condition tends to run in families. Agoraphobia may cause a person to avoid going places or doing things because of the fear of having a panic attack, of having no way to escape.","Discuss the issue with a doctor who is knowledgeable about the condition. Realise that the anxiety problem can be overcome. Do not use alcohol or other drugs to overcome anxiety. Learn as much as possible about agoraphobia, anxiety, and panic. Join a support group of others with similar problems, and share experiences and solutions."
Amyotrophic-lateral-sclerosis,"Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, is a disease of the motor nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. It causes progressive loss of motor control.","Symptoms usually do not develop until after the age of 50. Progressive loss of muscle strength and coordination eventually interfere with the ability to perform routine activities, such as going up steps, getting out of a chair or swallowing. Occasionally, breathing or swallowing muscles may be the first to be affected.As the disease progresses, more muscle groups are affected and patients become progressively incapacitated. There is no effect on the ability to think or reason. The symptoms include: muscle weakness, decrease in muscle strength and coordination gradual onset progressively worsens commonly involves one limb initially (such as the hand) progresses to difficulty lifting, climbing stairs, and walking paralysis muscle cramps voice changes, hoarseness speech impairment, slow or abnormal speech pattern difficulty swallowing, gags or chokes easily difficulty breathing (increasing effort required to breathe) head drop due to weak spinal and neck muscles Additional symptoms that may be associated with this disease: muscle contractions muscle spasms muscle atrophy ankle, feet and leg swelling weight loss drooling","There is no known cure for ALS. Riluzole may prolong life, but does not reverse or stop disease progression. Treatment is aimed at controlling the symptoms. Baclofen or diazepam may be used to control spasticity that interferes with activities of daily living. Trihexyphenidyl or amitriptyline may be prescribed for people with impaired ability to swallow saliva. Physical therapy, rehabilitation, use of appliances (such as braces or a wheelchair) or orthopedic intervention may be required to maximize muscle function and general health. Choking is common and there may be an early need for placement of a tube into the stomach for feeding (gastrostomy). A referral to an otolaryngologist may be advised. A nutritionist is helpful to prevent weight loss, especially for patients with limited ability to swallow. The use of devices to assist in breathing includes machines that are only used at night as well as mechanical ventilation. Patients should discuss their wishes regarding artificial ventilation with their doctors."
Abusive-head-trauma,"Also known as shaken baby syndrome, abusive head trauma (AHT) is a form of inflicted traumatic brain injury, which can be caused by direct blows to the head, dropping or throwing a child, or shaking a child vigrously.","The duration and force of the shaking and the number of episodes determine the severity of the infant's injuries. In the most violent cases, children may arrive at the emergency room unconscious, suffering seizures, or in shock. But in many cases, infants may never be brought to medical attention if they don't exhibit such identifiable signs and symptoms. In less severe cases, a child who has been shaken may experience: lethargy irritability vomiting poor sucking or swallowing decreased appetite lack of smiling or vocalizing rigidity seizures difficulty breathing altered consciousness unequal pupil size an inability to lift the head an inability to focus the eyes or track movement","Before age 3, a child can receive free speech therapy or physical therapy through state-run programs. After age 3, the childs school districts provides any needed special educational services.As kids get older, they may need special schooling and ongoing help to build language and daily living skills, like dressing."
Breast-Cancer,"Breast cancer is the uncontrolled malignant growth of cells in the breast tissue. There are many types of breast cancers, those that form in the milk glands, in the ducts that carry milk, in the fatty area or in the connective tissue of the breast. Cancer of the milk ducts is the most commonly occurring form of breast cancer. Usually only one breast is affected. There is a rare type of breast cancer in which the breast becomes red and swollen and resembles infection of the breast. Risk factors can be genetic, but few lifestyle factors like alcohol intake, smoking, regular sleep pattern and unhealthy diet make it more likely to happen. Awareness of the symptoms and the need for screening are important ways of reducing the risk.","The most common symptom of cancer of the breast is the presence of a lump in the breast. The patient herself often detects the lump either accidentally or during a routine self-examination. The lump is usually painless and hard. Sometimes, there may be changes in the shape and size of the breast and the nipple. A dimple in the skin overlying the breast accompanied with dryness and scaling should be a cause for concern. There may be discharge of blood stained fluid from the nipple along with dryness and cracking of the skin of the nipple.","Since the breast is not an organ that is necessary for survival, it is generally removed by a surgical procedure called mastectomy. In some cases only the lump is removed, in others the whole breast is removed."
Bulimia-nervosa,"Bulimia Nervosa is an eating disorder found most commonly in girls of late adolescence and early adulthood. It is characterized by frequent episodes of binge eating (rapid consumption of food in one sitting) followed by purging (ridding the body of food). Purging can involve vomiting, using laxatives, exercising compulsively and fasting. Binging and purging is associated with intense feelings of guilt and shame.",Being preoccupied with your body shape and weight.Living in fear of gaining weight.Repeated episodes of eating abnormally large amounts of food in one sitting.Feeling a loss of control during bingeing — like you can't stop eating or can't control what you eat.,"Treatment focuses on breaking the binge-purge cycles of behaviour. The problem should be discussed with a friend or someone in the family whom the person can confide in for help. She should be made to feel that she is in charge of her recovery and can certainly help herself overcome it. She should never be ridiculed or laughed at. If she tries to sort out the problem and shows a lapse from time to time to the original behaviour pattern, she should be given total support and encouragement. A form of psychotherapy called CBT (cognitive behavioural therapy) may be used by a psychiatrist or any other mental health professional to treat people with eating disorders. This form of talking treatment helps because the deeper emotional issues are sorted out. CBT will help a person adopt a healthier way of thinking about and dealing with food and help her overcome the guilt associated with eating. The results may take many weeks or months and support from family and friends is important for its success."
Burns,"The damage to body tissues on exposure to too much heat (dry or moist), cold (frostbite), radiation, electricity, friction, or chemicals is called a burn. Burns caused by hot water or steam, are called scalds. Burns are classified into first, second, and third degree, depending on the depth of tissue damage. A first-degree burn makes the skin red, like sunburn, while a second-degree burn causes blistering. A third-degree burn destroys the area of affected skin completely, resulting in serious scarring. Third-degree burns need special care. The treatment of burns depends on their depth and the extent and location of the area affected.","A first-degree burn is painful and sensitive to the touch. The skin becomes dry, red, sore, mildly swollen and may peel. It should feel better in a couple of days and heal in about a week if there are no complications. Second-degree burns are painful and swollen and show redness and blisters. The skin also develops a weepy, watery surface.The skin in third-degree burns appears discoloured, charred and leathery white with a dry surface. The pain is less than with first or second-degree burns or sometimes none at all, because the sensitive nerve endings in the skin are also destroyed. But pain is felt around the margins of the affected area. There is a rapid pulse and shock depending on the extent of burns. These always require emergency treatment and may require hospitalisation and skin grafting. Patients who sustain burns in closed spaces may develop respiratory distress due to inhalation of toxic and hot gases. They require immediate hospitalisation.","Minor burns should be immediately immersed in cold, running water and then covered with a clean, wet towel until the pain decreases. A clean, dry dressing is applied with a loose bandage over the area. Aspirin, paracetamol or ibuprofen are given for pain. Extensive and deep burns that are chemical or electrical in nature, or those that involve the face, hands feet, genitals or the respiratory tract, are more serious. The patient should be taken to the hospital for treatment, or transferred to a burns centre. As a first aid measure, he should be made to lie down and wrapped in a warm blanket to minimize shock. Treatment may include covering the burned area with a dressing. Antibiotics and intravenous fluids are given to prevent infection and treat fluid loss. Skin grafting may be done which involves transfer of normal skin (from the inside of the thigh or the forearm) to the burn site."
Bed-wetting,"Enuresis or bed wetting is the involuntary passage of urine beyond the age of anticipated control that is usually 5-6 years. 15-20% of children 5 years of age wet their beds. Nearly 5% of 10 year olds will wet, and 1% of adolescents and adults continue to wet. It is twice as common in boys as in girls. Bedwetting also seems to run in families.","Commonly, wetting at night is the only symptom, but some children also have frequent urination during the daytime with occasional wetting. It has been seen that children who are constipated are more likely to have enuresis.","The good thing is that a large number of children stop wetting as they grow up. But during the time that they are wetting, the social costs are enormous. These children need all the support and compassion from their parents and the care givers. Other methods that often help include: Behaviour modification techniques such as rewarding the child for remaining dry at night. The rewards may increase in value with each passing dry night. It is inappropriate to punish the child for a wet night. In fact, punishment worsens the situation. Fluid intake should be limited from the evening so that the child produces less urine. Sometimes this regime may be harsh to enforce on children. The use of alarm devices is beneficial. These alarms use a pad inserted into the child's underwear, so that as soon as the pad gets wet an alarm bell rings waking the child up before the bladder empties completely. This conditions the voiding mechanism in several children. Unfortunately, good quality alarms are not available in India. Counselling of the child and the family may be necessary in case an underlying emotional or interpersonal problem is suspected. In older children, and in those who fail to respond to the above methods of treatment, medicines may be prescribed. Imipramine is a commonly used drug that is normally prescribed for the treatment of depression in adults. It helps correct bedwetting in about 30% of children and needs to be given for 4-6 months. The side effects of imipramine include sleepiness and mood changes. Another medicine called desmopressin, that is a derivative of the hormone vasopressin also helps in about 30% cases. This drug is given as a spray into the nose. This latter drug is expensive.Most successful treatment programmes require a multifaceted approach. Often a combination of techniques gives better results. In case of relapse after stopping treatment, the regimen may need to be started all over again. Success in treatment depends on a motivated child and dedicated and compassionate parents."
Cervical-Cancer,"Cervical cancer is a disease caused by the abnormal growth and division of cells that make up the cervix (the portion of the uterus attached to the top of the vagina). Ninety percent of the cervical cancers arise from the flattened or squamous cells covering the cervix. Most of the remaining 10% arise from the glandular, mucous-secreting cells of the cervical canal leading into the uterus.","Most often, cervical cancer in its earliest and most treatable stages does not cause any symptoms. When there are symptoms, the most common are:","Treatment of cervical cancer depends on the type of cancer, the stage, the size and shape of the tumour, the age and general health of the woman, and her desire for future childbearing."
Cancer,"Cancer is the generic term used to describe a group of disorders caused by an abnormal, uncontrolled multiplication of cells, which usually resulting in the destruction of neighbouring tissues. Gradually, these tissues and organs stop functioning and death may occur. The reasons for cells to start multiplying is unknown in most cases. They may have some inbuilt abnormality or may be affected by external influences.","Cancers appear in many different ways. Most often they are noticed as a lump or growth in some part of the body. This is the case with tumours that form on the outlines of organs. When the cancerous growth is not physically identifiable, there may be other revealing symptoms depending on the form of cancer and the affected organ.","Treatment is most effective if the cancer is detected early. Chemotherapy is the most common method of treatment for cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. In this procedure, the malignant cells are destroyed with the help of powerful chemicals like methotrexate and vincristine which are given intra-venously i.e. directly injected into the veins. This procedure requires a hospital stay for the duration of therapy. It is also associated with various side effects like loss of hair, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite and weakness for some days.For a tumour that has not spread, radiotherapy or radiation, or surgery may be done. In the former, the cells are destroyed with the help of strong radioactive waves. The exact position of the tumour is marked and the area is exposed to radiation under strictly controlled conditions. This treatment is given in breaks and in pre-determined doses. Tumours that develop in organs under hormonal control like the breast, thyroid or prostate, may also be treated with endocrine therapy. In this treatment, either the source of the hormone is removed or anti-hormone drugs are given. This treatment scores over chemotherapy because it usually has less severe side effects. But the doctor decides the best course of treatment depending on the diagnosis of the form of cancer."
Colorectal-Cancer,"The colon and the rectum are parts of the large intestine. The intestine is an organ that helps in digestion and excretion. Digestion is mainly carried out by the small intestine, while excretion is the major function of the large intestine. A malignant growth of cells in the large intestine is called colorectal cancer. Separately, the cancer may be of the colon (colon cancer) or the rectum (rectal cancer).","Colorectal cancers may produce no symptoms till the disease is advanced. However, the most frequently noted symptoms that may be indicative of the disease are:","Surgery to remove the tumour is the most common form of treatment. If the tumour has not spread to other parts of the organ, it can be easily removed. Mostly some healthy parts of the intestine are also removed to reduce the risk of recurrence. Sometimes, a surgical procedure called colostomy is performed. This is done if the surgeon, after removing parts of the colon is unable to join it back with the rectum. In this, the colon opens in the skin of the abdomen, to allow faecal matter to drain and be collected in a bag. This procedure may be temporary or permanent."
Common-cold,"The common cold is a viral infection that affects the upper airways including the nose, voice box, throat, windpipes and the lungs. There are more than two hundred viruses that can cause colds and are commonly known as rhinoviruses or the nose viruses. These viruses cause inflammation or swelling of the mucous membrane lining the airways. The symptoms of common cold include sneezing, a scratchy throat, a stuffy nose, coughing, etc.","Symptoms generally show up about two days after a person becomes infected. Early signs of a cold are a sore, scratchy throat, sneezing, and a runny nose. Other symptoms that may occur later are: Headache Stuffy or runny nose Watering eyes Chills Weakness Cough and congestion Sore throat Fever and muscle ache.The symptoms generally last for 2 to 7 days and in some cases may last for weeks.","There is no cure for the common cold but managing symptoms is the best that can be done for the cold, as there is no specific treatment. Antibiotics will not cure colds, as they are caused by viruses and not bacteria. A person with a cold should drink plenty of fluids and take rest. Cold remedies are almost as common as the common cold, and many are nearly as ancient. Some cold remedies include: Water and other fluids - drinking plenty of liquids can help. Water, juice, clear broth or warm lemon water with honey helps loosen congestion and prevents dehydration. Avoid alcohol, coffee and caffeinated sodas, which make dehydration worse. Salt water - a saltwater gargle — 1/2 teaspoon salt in a glass of warm water — can temporarily relieve a sore or scratchy throat. Saline nasal sprays - over-the-counter saline nasal sprays combat stuffiness and congestion. Unlike nasal decongestants, saline sprays don't lead to a rebound effect — a worsening of symptoms when the medication is discontinued — and most are safe and nonirritating, even for children. Soup - scientists have found that soup does seem to help relieve cold and flu symptoms in two ways. First, it acts as an anti-inflammatory by inhibiting the movement of neutrophils — immune system cells that participate in the body's inflammatory response. Second, it temporarily speeds up the movement of mucus through the nose, helping relieve congestion and limiting the amount of time viruses are in contact with the nose lining. Over-the-counter cold medications - nonprescription decongestants and pain relievers offer some symptom relief, but they won't prevent a cold or shorten its duration, and most have some side effects. If used for more than a few days, they can actually make symptoms worse. Keep in mind that acetaminophen can cause serious liver damage or liver failure if taken in high doses. Humidity - cold viruses thrive in dry conditions — another reason why colds are more common in winter. Parched air also dries the mucous membranes, causing a stuffy nose and scratchy throat. A humidifier can add moisture to your home."
Cirrhosis,"This is a chronic liver disease in which there is extensive scarring of the liver and the liver cells are replaced by fibrous tissue (cirrhosis in Greek, means a hard, brown liver). This results in a progressive deterioration of liver function and ultimately death.","Initially the symptoms may be vague, like weakness, weight loss, indigestion, nausea and loss of interest in sex. Later features of liver cell failure appear. These include jaundice, vomiting blood, impotence, breast development in males and swelling all over the body. The increased collection of fluid in the body is due to a decrease in body proteins. The veins in the oesophagus (food pipe) are engorged due to increased pressure in the vein carrying blood to the liver. When these engorged veins burst, blood is lost in the vomit. Clotting of blood is also retarded because the factors responsible for clotting are not produced in sufficient quantities by the liver. The failing liver also is unable to remove poisonous products that accumulate in the body and affect the brain leading to drowsiness and, later, unconsciousness (liver encephalopathy).","Cirrhosis is an irreversible change in the liver. It can and should be prevented by restricting alcohol intake or by using anti-virus medicines like lamivudine, interferon and ribavarin. Once cirrhosis has set in, the complications and ultimate liver failure can be delayed by a good balanced diet, adequate vitamin supplementation, avoiding further insult to the liver and adequate rest. Endoscopic therapy to prevent bleeding from engorged veins in the food pipe has become an important treatment in the effort to prolong life. However, once there are features of end stage liver failure, the only treatment available is liver transplantation where the diseased organ is replaced by a normally functioning liver from a brain-dead or a live donor."
Cataract,"The lens of the eye is a biconvex, normally transparent structure behind the pupil. It focuses light rays into images on the retina, the light-sensitive lining at the back of the eye. A cataract is opacity or clouding of the lens. It prevents the lens from focussing light onto the retina, hence, causing hazy vision. Aging and other factors may cause the proteins in the lens to degenerate, forming opaque (cloudy) areas. They usually develop slowly over several years and are irreversible. As the cataract advances, the cloudiness of vision increases over a period of time until the vision is completely impaired. Advanced cataract can cause blindness, but they can be successfully treated with surgery.","The symptoms of cataract are variable because they form in different ways. In most patients, the initial symptoms of cataracts are progressively cloudy vision, double vision, or both. Objects may begin to look yellow, hazy, blurred or distorted. People may experience increasing nearsightedness needing frequent change of eyeglasses. Others may find that they need more light to see clearly. Cataracts can cause other visual disturbances – decrease of colour vibrancy, difficulty in reading and coloured haloes around lights. People having diffuse cataracts in the rear walls of their lenses are more likely to experience glare, because their cataracts lead to scattering of light. In later stages the decrease of vision leads to blindness.","Early cataracts, if they lead to near-sightedness, may be managed by prescribing stronger eyeglasses or contact lenses. No medical treatment can prevent or reverse the development of cataracts. Once a cataract develops, surgical removal is still the only remedy. Cataract surgery is usually done as a day-care procedure under local anaesthesia and takes about half an hour. A cataract extraction with intra-ocular lens implantation is a procedure in which the cataract is replaced with an artificial lens implant."
Cerebral-palsy,"Cerebral palsy is a group of disorders resulting from brain damage that occurs before, during or shortly after birth. It is characterised by loss of movement and nerve functions. Those affected by it have problems in mobility (crawling, creeping, walking), use of hands (eating, writing, dressing) and communication.",Early sucking difficulty with the breast or bottle. Lack of normal muscle tone and slow development of milestones. Unusual body postures. Purposeless body movements and poor coordination. Various degrees of mental retardation and speech impediments.,"There is no specific cure but the goal of treatment is to make the child independent. This can be done by providing help through physiotherapy, orthopaedic correction, braces, appropriate visual help such as spectacles, hearing aids, medications and special schooling if possible. The child can be sent to a normal school if his physical disabilities or mental development allow. Medications may include drugs to reduce muscle tension or control seizures.Above all, the parents need to understand and come to terms with the problem that their child has, in order to help him in the best possible way. They can join a support group (like the ""The Spastics Society"" ), where they can learn more about the problem by experts in the field, they can meet parents having children with similar problems, discuss problems and share experiences common to both thereby working towards better management of the child at home."
Clubfoot,"Clubfoot is a congenital deformity, i.e. present at birth. It affects the foot and/or ankle. In patients with clubfoot, the bones, joints, blood vessels, and muscles in the foot are formed incorrectly. This results in either mild or severe deformities. Most notable is the `kidney shape' of the foot. It can affect one or both feet, more frequently the left. In about half of the cases, both feet are affected.Clubfoot can occur by itself or it can be accompanied by other birth defects such as malformation syndromes or chromosomal syndromes.There are three types of clubfoot: Calcaneal ValgusThere is an angling of the foot at the heel. When this occurs, the top of the foot looks as if it is bent to the side and the toes point up and out. Matatarusus Varus In this the front of the foot is turned inwards. Talipes Equinovarus Here the foot is turned inwards and down.In clubfoot, each child is likely to have some of each of the following: Plantar flexion: this refers to the twisting of the ankle which causes the heel to be drawn up. Cavus foot deformity: this refers to the high arch of the foot. In some cases a high arch is very noticeable. In other cases, because of the angling of the foot, the height may be difficult to determine. In these cases, a crosswise crease on the sole of the foot may be a good indication. Varus: this refers to the inversion of the heel which causes the front of the foot to turn inward Adduction of the forefoot: this refers to amount the forefoot is pulled downward",Noticeable deformity in the foot Stiffness in the ankle or in foot tendons The calf appears shorter than the other leg (in cases where only one foot is affected) Foot or feet turned or twisted awkwardly Affected foot lacks the normal range of motion,"It is important to treat clubfoot as soon as it is diagnosed to avoid later problems. With proper and professional treatment, clubfoot does not represent a long-term disability or handicap. In many cases, it can be corrected within about six to eight weeks by exercise, manipulation and stretching of the heel cord, and casting. Chances of correction are optimal during the first two weeks of life, when the tissues and ligaments are very elastic-like and pliable. The treatment should begin as early as possible - ideally, just after birth when the foot is easiest to reshape.In more severe cases of clubfoot, surgery may be required to lengthen the heel cord. The forefoot correction and hind foot correction take more time and the heel cord lengthening can be left until the child is older. Surgery can be accompanied by scarring, stiffness and muscle weakness that can become disabling in later years. If passive treatment of the condition, such as using stretching or casting or both, is used, it is important to have the foot evaluated periodically. There is a tendency for clubfoot to relapse because of growth. This is true particularly in the first two or three years of life, although it is possible it may happen even up to age 7. Splints are used after the last cast comes off to help prevent the clubfoot from reappearing. The splints must be worn full-time for several months, and then nightly for the following two to four years."
Diabetes,"Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the body's inability to regulate the level of glucose in the blood. Glucose is the main form of sugar in the body. The body breaks down food into glucose and uses it as a source of energy. In healthy people insulin helps to regulate the glucose (sugar) levels. Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas (a long, thin organ located behind the stomach against the back). ",Symptoms depend on the type and duration of diabetes. Some of the signs and symptoms are related to the high blood sugar levels. ,"Although diabetes cannot be cured, it can be controlled very successfully. The main aim of treatment of all types of diabetes is to achieve blood glucose control, blood pressure and cholesterol levels as near to normal as possible. This, together with a healthy lifestyle, will help to improve wellbeing and protect against long-term complications."
Diabetic-Neuropathy,"Diabetes over long period of time can damage the nerves. High blood glucose, can damage many parts of the body, such as the heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys and feet. The problem with feet like loss of feeling in your feet can make it hard for you to tell if you have a blister or sore. If little sores aren't taken care of, they can get worse and turn into ulcers (serious, deep sores). If these ulcers become infected, you may have to go to the hospital or, in very serious cases, have a foot amputated (removed).","Symptoms depend on the type of neuropathy and the nerves affected. Some people have no symptoms at all. For others, numbness, tingling, or pain in the feet is often the first sign. A person may experience both pain and numbness. Often, symptoms are minor at first, and since most nerve damage occurs over several years, mild cases may go unnoticed for a long time.Symptoms may include: numbness, tingling, or pain in the toes, feet, legs, hands, arms, and fingers","The first step is to bring the blood glucose levels within the normal range to prevent further nerve damage. Blood glucose monitoring, meal planning, exercise, and oral drugs or insulin injections are needed to control blood glucose levels. Although symptoms may get worse when blood glucose is first brought under control, over time, maintaining lower blood glucose levels helps lessen neuropathic symptoms.Foot carePeople with neuropathy need to take special care of their feet. The nerves to the feet are the longest in the body and are the ones most often affected by neuropathy. Loss of sensation in the feet means that sores or injuries may not be noticed and may become ulcerated or infected. Circulation problems also increase the risk of foot ulcers."
Diabetic-Retinopathy,Diabetic retinopathy is an eye problem which can lead to blindness. It affects people with uncontrolled sugar levels.,More about Diabetes and eyes ,Diabetic retinopathy cannot always be treated. But people with mild condition do need to keep their blood sugar and blood pressure levels as close to normal as possible. This helps keep the condition from getting worse besides the following treatment can help:
Diphtheria,Diphtheria is an acute bacterial disease caused by Corynebacterium Diphtheriae. It is highly contagious and spreads in overcrowded areas. The disease is transmitted through respiratory secretions or droplets in the air. The bacteria may enter the body through the nose or mouth. They may also enter through a break in the skin and may colonise wound surfaces.,"The bacteria multiply in the throat or on the wound. They may form a membrane in the throat and over the tonsils. Other common symptoms include breathing difficulty, a husky voice, enlarged lymph glands in the neck (Bull neck), nasal drainage, low-grade fever and an increased heart rate.Diphtheria may often have symptoms due to the toxins produced by the causative bacteria resulting in Diphtheritic myocarditis (toxic damage to the heart muscles) and neuritis (toxic damage to the peripheral nerves).","The goal of treatment is to neutralize the effect of the toxins, eliminate further toxin production, control the local infection and prevent transmission. Penicillin is usually effective in treating diphtheria before it releases toxins into the blood. However one must neutralise the Diphtheria toxin circulating in the blood stream. This is done by giving an antitoxin in combination with the antibiotic. Rarely, a tracheostomy (a breathing tube inserted into the wind pipe by an operation) may be needed if the patient has severe breathing difficulties. A cardiac pacemaker may have to be given to the patient if there is severe slowing of the heart rate."
Diabetes-mellitus,"Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the body's inability to regulate the level of glucose in the blood. Glucose is the main form of sugar in the body. The body breaks down food into glucose and uses it as a source of energy. In healthy people insulin helps to regulate the glucose (sugar) levels. Insulin is a hormone produced by the pancreas (a long, thin organ located behind the stomach against the back). In diabetics, the body does not produce enough insulin or does not use the produced insulin effectively. This results in a high level of glucose in the blood (""hyperglycaemia""). There are four main types of diabetes mellitus:a) Type 1, earlier known as insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus. People with this type of diabetes make little or no insulin in their body, and need regular insulin injections for survival and management of diabetes. It usually starts in childhood, but can occur at any age. b) Type 2 (DM2), earlier known as non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) or adult-onset diabetes. This is the most common form of diabetes, and is strongly associated with genetic tendency and obesity. The body produces normal or even high levels of insulin, but certain factors make its utilization ineffective (""insulin resistance""). Sedentary lifestyle, unhealthy dietary patterns, and the consequent obesity are common causes. It usually starts in adulthood, but is beginning to be seen in obese adolescents also. c) Gestational diabetes mellitus, or pregnancy-induced diabetes. d) Secondary diabetes mellitus, caused by genetic conditions, pancreatic diseases (e.g. inflammation, surgery or malignancy of the pancreas, etc.), drugs (e.g. steroids like prednisolone, pentamidine, excess thyroid hormone, etc.) or other medical conditions (acromegaly, Cushing syndrome, pheochromocytoma, hyperthyroidism, congenital rubella, etc). Medications such as thiazide diuretics or oral contraceptives can precipitate diabetes in a person predisposed to get it later.","Symptoms depend on the type and duration of diabetes. Some of the signs and symptoms are related to the high blood sugar levels. These include: Increased urination Increased thirst HungerOther common symptoms: Fatigue Blurred vision Urinary and vaginal infections Skin infections, especially fungal or more serious bacterial infections Frequently upset stomach, stomach pains, nausea and vomitingThere may be weight loss, especially if the amount of insulin made by the body is decreasing. If insulin deficiency is marked, the person can become drowsy and then go into coma. This is called Ketoacidosis, and usually occurs in DM1. Rarely, if the diabetes is completely out of control, it can also occur in DM2. Other symptoms of ketoacidosis include: Deep rapid breathing, sometimes with a fruity odour to the breath Pain in the stomach, with nausea and vomiting","The treatment of diabetes depends on the type of diabetes. It is aimed to decrease symptoms and prevent complications such as low blood sugar levels (hypoglycemia), eye problems, kidney disease, and nerve damage.DM1 needs treatment with insulin injections to replace the insulin that is not produced in the body. There are several types of insulin available. The most commonly used are the genetically engineered that are similar to human insulin. The difference in the various types of insulin is the times at which they ""peak"" or are most effective. Insulin schedule depends upon the meal pattern of the individual. This is required to avoid low blood glucose levels, causing hypoglycaemia. Insulin is administered with a syringe, and newer devices such as insulin pens and insulin pumps. The latter devices control diabetes more efficiently.DM2 (earlier called NIDDM) is initially treated with weight reduction, diet control and regular exercises. When these measures fail to control the blood sugar levels, oral medicines are used. Sulphonylureas are a group of drugs that stimulate the release of insulin from the pancreas. Metformin reduces insulin resistance, and the production of glucose by the liver. Thiazolidenediones also increase insulin efficiency and sensitivity. Acarbose delays the absorption of glucose by the intestines. When the action of oral drugs is insufficient, insulin injections are added.Exercise: It is an important component of diabetes therapy. Exercise utilizes blood sugar and makes the body more sensitive to insulin. It also reduces high blood pressure and high lipid levels, which are often associated with diabetes.Diet: There is no such thing as a ""diabetic diet"". Persons with diabetes should eat a normal, balanced diet, which is designed to meet their nutritional requirements, maintain normal blood sugar levels and at the same time to help in achieving appropriate weight (i.e. reduction in case of obese persons, regain in case of very lean persons). It is also important to eat meals at regular time intervals, especially if insulin is used."
Dental-caries,"Teeth affect our physical, mental, and social health. Good teeth are needed to chew food into pieces small enough for the digestive system to handle. They also help us look and feel good. Neglected teeth become diseased and cannot perform their function. They may cause bad breath and spoil a smile as well.","Initially there may be no symptoms while the enamel is being eaten away. Later, tooth sensitivity may be noticed. There may be discomfort while eating sweet foods and hot or cold drinks or foods. If the cavity becomes very large or a tooth abscess develops which may be accompanied by pain, swelling or fever. This is why it is important to have frequent dental check ups. If it hurts, it is already too late.","Small cavities are treated by simple fillings. It is possible to have tooth-coloured filling using special compounds to avoid detection. If a part of the tooth has decayed material, it is removed and the resultant hole in the tooth is filled. Fillings are usually made of silver-mercury or resin. If the decay has reached the central portion of the tooth that contains the nerves and blood vessels (pulp), a root canal treatment is advised wherein the decayed pulp is removed, a filling done and the tooth covered by a cap or crown. Most dental procedures are performed under local anaesthesia where the local nerves are numbed."
Diarrhoea-in-children,Diarrhoea is the passage of watery stools without blood. It is the body's way of getting rid of germs. Some of the main reasons why kids get it is due to infection from viruses.  ,"A child with viral diarrhoea has fever and usually it is preceded by vomitings. In spite of the frequent loose stools, the baby does not look very ill. The paediatrician must be consulted immediately if the baby is less than 6 months of age, has blood in the stool (dysentery), has frequent vomitings, significant abdominal pain or fullness of abdomen or urinates less frequently and is extremely thirsty and has dry lips and mouth with poor intake of liquids, has high fever, weight loss or is malnourished.","As long as the child acts well and is taking adequate fluids and food, loose stools are not a great concern. Children should continue to eat a normal diet including formula or milk while they have mild diarrhoea. Breastfeeding should continue. If the babies abdomen appears bloated the doctor must be consulted to discuss a temporary change in diet. Special fluids are recommended to replace water and salts lost from the body during diarrhoea. These fluid solutions called oral rehydration solutions or ORS are extremely helpful for the home management of mild to moderately severe diarrhoea. Although readymade solutions are available with the chemists, a cheaper option is to buy the powder and reconstitute the solution at home."
Depression,"Clinical depression is a medical condition where a person feels very low or sad over a long period of time. It is more severe than the general feeling of hopelessness that a person may feel after a particularly stressful event in her life and often results in a change in the person's functioning. During bouts of depression, a person feels extremely dejected and has feelings of inadequacy or low self esteem. They take a gloomy outlook upon life.",A patient with depression may have physical symptoms in addition to psychological ones. The most commonly seen symptoms are:,"Drug treatment is the most common method of treatment. Antidepressants are prescribed in adequate doses. These generally include oral medication from a group of drugs known as tricyclic antidepressants. These have a calming effect on the patient and also help in reducing sleep problems.Therapy to improve the patient’s outlook towards events is begun in conjunction with the drug treatment. The person is encouraged to think positively and to shun thoughts of worthlessness, guilt and suicide.In severe cases, shock treatment (Electro Convulsive therapy) is given. It is mostly resorted to when the patient cannot wait for the drugs to become effective or when she goes into deeper depression and stops reacting completely to situations, a condition known as depressive stupor. A combination of treatment measures is usually helpful in bringing depressive episodes under control."
Dental-fluorosis,"Dental fluorosis is a tooth defect that is caused by excessive intake of fluorides in the drinking water. Although the permanent teeth are affected, occasionally even the primary teeth may be involved.",It is easy to recognize dental fluorosis. Initially there may be a few white flecks or small pits on the enamel of the teeth. Later there may be brown stains. Dental fluorosis and dental caries seem to go hand in hand.,Fluorosis treatment options include: Removal of stains through tooth whitening. Adding a hard resin coating to the tooth which bonds with enamel (known as bonding) Crowns and veneers.
Diverticulosis,"The colon (large intestine) is a long tube-like structure that stores and then removes waste material. With increasing age in a person, pressure within the colon causes bulging pockets of tissue (sacs) that push out from the colon walls. A small bulging sac pushing outward from the colon wall is called a diverticulum. More than one bulging sac is referred to as diverticula. Diverticula can occur throughout the colon but are most common near the end of the left colon called the sigmoid colon. The condition of having these diverticula in the colon is called diverticulosis, also known as diverticular disease. This condition is uncommon before the age of 40 years, but its incidence increases after this age.","Whereas most patients with diverticular disease have no or few symptoms, some patients do develop bleeding, infection (diverticulitis), changes in bowel movements (diarrhoea or constipation), bloating, cramps (often in the left lower abdomen) after meals or otherwise and even colon obstruction.Sometimes, symptoms include nonspecific chronic discomfort in the lower left abdomen, with occasional acute episodes of sharper pain. The discomfort is sometimes described as a general feeling of pressure in the region, or pulling sensation. A tickling sensation may be felt as the small pockets fill and unfill; a feeling like gas may be moving in areas outside the colon. At the first occurrence of bleeding, a doctor should be contacted.","Most often, diverticulosis requires no treatment. Increase in hydration by increasing fibre content in the diet or removing factors resulting in constipation helps decrease the incidence of new diverticula or possibly keep them from bursting or inflating. However, if there is an infection (diverticulitis), surgery is required to decrease relapse or other complications."
ELISA-Test-For-HIV,What is an ELISA test for HIV?,,
Eczema,"Eczema, also referred to as atopic dermatitis, is a red, extremely itchy rash, most common on creases of elbows, wrists, and knees. It may occasionally occur on neck, ankles, and feet. The rash becomes raw and weepy on scratching. The itching has a vicious cycle wherein scratching causes more irritation leading to more itching and scratching. Atopic dermatitis is most often seen in infants and children, but it can continue into adulthood or first appear later in life.Infantile eczemaWhen atopic dermatitis occurs in infants, it's called infantile eczema. This condition begins in infancy and may continue into childhood and adolescence. Infantile eczema often involves an oozing, crusting rash, mainly on the face and scalp, but it can occur anywhere. After infancy, the rash becomes dryer and tends to be red to brown-gray in colour. In adolescence, the skin may be scaly or thickened and easily irritated. The intense itching may continue.","Signs and symptoms of atopic dermatitis include: Red to brownish-gray coloured patches. Itching, which may be severe, especially at night. Small, raised bumps, which may leak fluid and crust over when scratched. Thickened, cracked or scaly skin. Raw, sensitive skin from scratching.","Treatments for atopic dermatitis aim to reduce inflammation, relieve itching and prevent future flare-ups. Over-the-counter (nonprescription) anti-itch creams, along with other self-care measures, may help control mild atopic dermatitis. Although atopic dermatitis is related to allergies, eliminating allergens is rarely helpful in treating the condition. Occasionally, items that trap dust — such as feather pillows, down comforters, mattresses, carpeting and drapes — can worsen the condition. Allergy shots usually aren't successful in treating atopic dermatitis and might even make the condition worse.Local steroid creams are the main treatment for the itching in eczema. Use these as prescribed by the doctor. After the rash settles down, use it at least once daily for another 2 weeks. It can be used whenever the itching or rash develops. Good hydration of the skin followed by a lubricating cream is the main way to prevent flare-ups of eczema. Water-soaked skin is much less itchy. The eczematous skin is very sensitive to soaps, therefore avoid soaps as much as possible, especially during flare-ups. Alternatively, use a mild, moisturising soap. The skin is generally dry in eczema. After a good bath, the skin feels good due to hydration. The moisture in the skin can be retained by applying a layer of lubricating cream to the entire skin while it is damp. Apply it daily after the steroid cream has been applied to the itchy areas. Avoid applying any ointments or petroleum jelly because they block the sweat glands, increase the itching, and worsen the rash, especially in warm weather. Also, soap is needed to wash them off, which can aggravate the problem. Keep the fingernails cut short as the scratching with nails will perpetuate the vicious cycle of itching. Frequent hand washing will avoid any super-infection of the eczema."
Female-orgasmic-disorder,"Female orgasmic disorder is the inability to achieve orgasm by some women despite adequate sexual arousal. Women have individual differences in the amount of stimulation needed for them to achieve an orgasm. However, when the doctor feels that the woman’s orgasmic capacity is less than what would be expected of a woman of her age and sexual experience, the disorder is diagnosed.Women having the disorder fall on a scale describing the intensity of the disorder. There are some women who never reach a climax. Then are women who achieve an orgasm only during masturbation, but never with their partners. In the middle range fall women who need stimulation of the clitoris in addition to vaginal stimulation, but are able to climax with their partners. Near the upper range are women who do not need much stimulation to achieve an orgasm.The disorder can be life long or situational. In the former, the woman has never had an orgasm, either through masturbation or with a partner. In the latter, the disorder is temporary and may be caused due to unconducive situations.",Lack of vaginal lubrication.Lack of vaginal dilation or lengthening.Decreased genital tumescence or swelling.Decreased genital or nipple sensation.,"There is no specific treatment for the disorder. If it is because of dryness of the vagina, lubricants are given which help to make intercourse easier. If psychological help is sought, the partners are asked to relax during the act and enjoy it rather than work towards the achievemtn of an orgasm. The partners should know each other’s preferences and work towards maximizing the pleasure. Partners are advised to communicate with each other and spend more time in foreplay. This helps to induce adequate lubrication. Other techniques of lovemaking like oral sex and mutual masturbation are advised. The best way to achieve orgasm is to remain positive and relax during sexual intercourse."
Fainting,Fainting is defined as a loss of awareness or consciousness for an interval of time. The medical term used to describe fainting is syncope.,"The symptoms that a patient may feel before fainting are heart palpitations that is feeling or hearing the heart beating very fast, nausea or a feeling of vomiting or dizziness, weakness, palpitation and a black out.","The treatment will depend upon the cause of fainting. In case of abnormality in heartbeats, medicine will be prescribed. In case of reduction of blood flow to the brain because of problems in the blood vessels, specific blood flow increasing drugs may be prescribed."
Fungal-infections-of-the-skin,"Different fungi, depending on their location on the body, cause ringworm. Ringworm is characterised by ring-shaped, red, scaly patches with clearing centers. There is an increased risk of contracting ringworm if a person:is malnourishedhas poor hygienelives in a warm climatehas contact with other persons or pets that have ringwormis immunocompromised by disease or medicationThe most common types of ringworm include the following:Jock itch (tinea cruris or groin ringworm)-  This condition is also more common in males and occurs more often during warm weather conditions. It is very rare in females. Symptoms of jock itch may include red, ring-like patches, pain and itching in the groin area. Treatment involves keeping the affected area clean and dry and applying topical antifungal medications. Jock itch usually responds to over-the-counter antifungal creams and sprays.Athlete's foot (tinea pedis or foot ringworm) -  This common condition mostly affects teen and adult males. Contributing causes include sweating, not drying the feet well after swimming or bathing, wearing tight socks and shoes, and warm weather conditions. Symptoms of athlete's foot may include whitening of the skin between the toes, scaling of the feet, itchy rash and blisters on the feet. Athlete's foot is treated with topical antifungal medication in most cases. Severe cases may require oral medications. The feet must be kept clean and dry, as the fungus grows in moist environments.Scalp ringworm (tinea capitis) - Scalp ringworm is highly contagious, especially among children. It occurs mainly in children between the ages of 2 to 10 years. It rarely occurs in adults. Symptoms of scalp ringworm include red, scaly rash on the scalp along with itching and hair loss. Ringworm of the scalp can also develop into a kerion, a large, tender lesion over the area of the initial ringworm. This is caused by a hypersensitivity to the ringworm and may be associated with a rash elsewhere and tender lymph nodes in the neck.Nail ringworm (tinea unguium) An infection of the finger or toe nail, characterised by a thickened, deformed nail. This condition more often affects the toenails than the fingernails. This occurs more often in adolescents and adults rather than young children. Symptoms of nail ringworm include thickening of the ends of the nails and a yellow colour to the nails.Body ringworm (tinea corporis) This skin infection is characterised by a ring-like rash anywhere on the body or the face. It occurs in all ages, but is seen more frequently in children. It is more common in warmer climates. The symptoms include red, circular lesion with raised edges. The middle of the lesion may become less red as the lesion grows and there is associated itching.Treatment for scalp ringworm (tinea capitis) may include an oral anti-fungal medication that is usually prescribed for four to eight weeks. This also involves the use of a special shampoo, to help eliminate the fungus. If a kerion is present (a large, tender, swollen lesion), additional medications, such as steroids maye be given to help reduce the swelling. Treatment for ringworm of the body, groin, and foot is usually a topical anti-fungal agent or an oral antifungal medication. The length of the treatment depends on the location of the ringworm. Because the fungi can live indefinitely on the skin, recurrences of ringworm are likely. Treatment may need to be repeated.","Red, itchy, scaly, circular skin rash","Fungal infections are typically treated with antifungal drugs, usually with antifungal drugs that are applied directly to the affected area (called topical drugs). Topical drugs may include creams, gels, lotions, solutions, or shampoos. Antifungal drugs may also be taken by mouth."
Gestational-Diabetes,Gestational diabetes is caused when the body of a pregnant woman does not secrete excess insulin required during pregnancy leading to increased blood sugar levels.,"Sugar in the urine. Unusual thirst.Frequent urination.Fatigue.Nausea.Blurred vision.Vaginal, bladder and skin infections.","The goals of treatment are to keep blood sugar (glucose) levels within normal limits during the pregnancy, and to make sure that the growing baby is healthyOne can keep their blood glucose in control with the help of a"
Gall-Bladder-Cancer,Gall bladder cancer is cancer in the gall nladder which is a relatively uncommon cancer. , ,"Treatment for biliary tract cancers depends on the type and stage of cancer as well as on the patient’s age and overall health. The goal of treatment is to completely eliminate the cancer. Unfortunately, this is often not possible and the focus may need to be changed to treating the signs and symptoms the cancer is causing or preventing the tumour from causing more harm."
Gout-and-high-blood-uric-acid-levels-(hyperuricaemia),"Gout is an excruciatingly painful acute arthritis seen almost exclusively in men above 40 years of age; children and women in reproductive age do not get gouty arthritis. Similarly, it is very uncommon to see gouty arthritis in men below 40 years of age. Gout is often a familial arthritis with history of similar acute attacks in father, uncles, grandfather. It belongs to a major class of arthritis called ‘crystal-deposition arthritis’. A gouty attack usually starts in the middle of the night after a big party where the patient might have indulged in heavy eating and binge drinking. There is a sudden acute severe painful swelling of any of the joints in the ankle-feet region, but most often in the joint at the base of the big toe. In its acute stage, usually a single joint is affected. The joint swells up with excruciating pain; even touching the joint with a soft cloth elicits sever pain. The overlying skin becomes severely inflamed with dusky reddish-brown discolouration.",severe pain in your joints.joint stiffness.difficulty moving affected joints.redness and swelling.misshapen joints.,"Treatment of acute gouty attack requires immediate control of the acute joint symptoms followed by strategies to prevent future possible attacks, and joint and tissue damage due to the deposition of uric acid crystals in the long run. Acute attack is treated with the use of fast acting anti-inflammatory drugs. Commonly used drugs belong to the category of so-called non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). There are several of them like ibuprofen, diclofenac, naproxen, indomethacin. However, most of them have a major side-effect i.e. severe irritation of the gastrointestinal tract that may even lead to ulcer formation (called peptic ulcer). The newer anti-inflammatory drugs called coxibs (celecoxib, etoricoxib) have much less gastrointestinal toxicity with equal efficacy in controlling acute gouty attack."
HIV-&-AIDS,"The Human Immuno-deficiency Virus or HIV is the organism that ultimately causes AIDS. Soon after first getting the HIV infection the person has a short, self limiting ‘flue-like disease. This only lasts a few days and is so mild that many persons do not even know it. The virus slowly destroys the ability of the body to resist common communicable diseases. When tha resistance of the body is so reduced that infections can no longer be resisted, the person is said to have AIDS. The mean period between getting the HIV infection and developing AIDS is 9.8 years. In other words, in 9.8 years half the HIV infected persons can be expected to develop AIDS and conversely it must be emphasized that half the persons will still be well and healthy at this time.","The symptoms of AIDS are the symptoms of the diseases that attack the body because of a weakened immune system. One should never, therefore, attempt to diagnose HIV infection on the basis of symptom or signs only. Patients with HIV/AIDS may present with a variety of manifestations which include:","Currently, there no cure for HIV / AIDS . Once you have the infection, your body can not get rid of it. However, there are many medications that can control HIV and prevent complications. These medications are called antiretroviral therapy (ART)."
Hypertension-(High-blood-pressure),"Blood pressure is the force of the blood pushing against the walls of the arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps out blood into the arteries. The blood pressure is highest when the heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When the heart is at rest, between beats, the blood pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure. It is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). High blood pressure (or hypertension) is defined in an adult as a blood pressure greater than or equal to 140 mm Hg systolic pressure or greater than or equal to 90 mm Hg diastolic pressure. 120/80 mm Hg or lower is normal blood pressure and 120 and 139 mm Hg systolic or between 80 and 89 mm Hg diastolic is prehypertension High bloodpressure directly increases the risk of coronary heart disease (which leads to heart attack) and stroke, especially when it's present with other risk factors. One can control high blood pressure through healthy lifestyle habits and taking medicines, if needed.","Most people with high blood pressure have no signs or symptoms, even if blood pressure readings reach dangerously high levels.Although a few people with early-stage high blood pressure may have dull headaches, dizzy spells or a few more nosebleeds than normal, these signs and symptoms typically don't occur until high blood pressure has reached an advanced — possibly life-threatening — stage.","Stop smoking Maintain a normal body weight – reduce if over-weight. Eating too much salt makes high blood pressure worse. Low-sodium diets are prescribed to help control high blood pressure. These limit the amount of sodium in the diet to less than 2 grams per day (about half the amount of sodium in the average diet). Eat a healthy diet containing soluble fibre, such as fruit and vegetables. Avoid high fat foods. Avoid coffee and colas Do not drink excessive alcohol. Exercise regularly to keep fit. Reduce stress and relax after work. Follow-up regularly with the doctor."
Hydrocoele,A hydrocoele is an accumulation of fluid around a testicle on one or both sides.,"An enlarged scrotum on one or both sides.A bulging area within the groin.The condition is usually painless, although sometimes it may cause a dragging sensation or mild pain.","Surgical treatment is recommended if: A hydrocoele that was present at birth remains after the child has reached the age of one year. It causes pain and discomfort due to its size and is not resolving. Swelling increases and decreases (suggesting that the opening is big enough to allow fluid to flow freely back and forth between the area of the hydrocoele and the abdominal cavity.In adults, a hydrocoele can be treated by a process called needle aspiration (a thin needle is used to withdraw the fluid). After this, the chance of recurrence of a hydrocoele is quite high. Another aspiration technique involves removing the fluid and then injecting thickening or hardening medications such as tetracycline, sodium tetradecyl sulphate, or urea to close off the lining of the scrotal sac and prevent reaccumulation of the fluid. Surgery (Hydrocoelectomy) is the most common form of treatment. This procedure is done under general or spinal anaesthesia. There can be possible complications of surgery which include haematoma (blood clot formation), abscess or injury to the scrotal tissues. Hydrocoelectomy does not however affect sperm or hormone production of the testicles."
Hernia-in-children,"The testes originally develop in the back of the abdominal cavity of the foetus. Later they descend to the scrotum. During their passage out of the abdomen they drag with them a sleeve of peritoneum, the thin membrane that lines the abdominal cavity. This sleeve is present on both sides, the left and the right. Once the testes are placed in the scrotum at birth this sleeve-like connection with the abdominal cavity closes off. If it doesn't close off, then fluid from the abdomen may trickle down into the extension of peritoneum to produce a balloon like swelling in the scrotum. This is a hydrocoele. If the connection with the abdominal cavity is wider, then even intestinal loops descend down producing a swelling in the groin called hernia. Hernias and hydrocoeles are very common in children.","The parents will notice a swelling in the groin or the scrotum. The swelling may come and go. It is usually more prominent when the child cries or strains, or later in the day. This is because any factor that increases abdominal pressure is likely to increase the swelling. Since crying increases the swelling, the parents often feel that the swelling is the cause of pain. This is not true, as the swelling does not cause the child any discomfort as long as it goes in and out. Sometimes in hernias, the intestines come out but fail to go back inside and get stuck in the hernial sac. This produces a painful tender swelling and the child becomes irritable and vomits. This is an emergency, and if the child is not immediately operated upon the intestinal loop may die and will have to be removed. No such emergency happens in cases of hydrocoele which contains only fluid.","Hydrocoeles are commonly present in infants. In a number of them, the sac obliterates on its own in the first one or two years of life. Therefore, hydrocoeles need not be operated upon during this age unless they become very large and show no sign of spontaneous closure.Hernias on the other hand need to be operated as early as possible after the diagnosis is made. This is because of the intestines getting stuck. The operation is performed under general anaesthesia and usually lasts 30-45 minutes. During the operation, the connection with the abdominal cavity is tied off. The operation for hernia and hydrocoele is identical and is called herniotomy. The baby is able to feed shortly after the operation and there are no special restrictions on activity unlike similar operations in adults. The operation is performed as a day care procedure and admission to hospital is not required except in very small babies. With the new technique a waterproof dressing allows the baby to be bathed and the wound is repaired with absorbable stitches that do not need to be removed.There is at present no role of treatment of hernias in children using the laparoscopic technique that is so popular in adults."
HIV-infection-and-AIDS,"The Human Immuno-deficiency Virus or HIV is the organism that ultimately causes AIDS. Soon after first getting the HIV infection the person has a short, self limiting ‘flue-like disease. This only lasts a few days and is so mild that many persons do not even know it. The virus slowly destroys the ability of the body to resist common communicable diseases. When tha resistance of the body is so reduced that infections can no longer be resisted, the person is said to have AIDS. The mean period between getting the HIV infection and developing AIDS is 9.8 years. In other words, in 9.8 years half the HIV infected persons can be expected to develop AIDS and conversely it must be emphasized that half the persons will still be well and healthy at this time.Once a person has lost the ability to resist common infections and has developed AIDS, the prognosis is poor and death usually comes in 12 to 18 months unless anti-retroviral treatment is initiated. On anti-retrovirals a person can be expected to be sustained for long time. The infection is not cured and treatment must continue life-long.It must be stressed again that in the early stages of HIV infection, the person feels well and is able to function normally. Examination by a doctor will not reveal any illness and the only detected abnormality is a positive blood test. Such persons should be encouraged to live normally and continue their normal occupation.AIDS is a serious illness caused by infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV breaks down the body's immune system, so the person with AIDS can no longer fight off disease successfully. As a result, secondary infections, cancerscan more easily take root in the body.It takes from 6 weeks to several months for the body to form sufficient antibodies (proteins produced in response to infection to show a positive test). When these antibodies can be detected in the blood, the patient is said to be HIV-positive. AIDS is a much later stage when the ability to fight off serious infections is lost.","The symptoms of AIDS are the symptoms of the diseases that attack the body because of a weakened immune system. One should never, therefore, attempt to diagnose HIV infection on the basis of symptom or signs only. Patients with HIV/AIDS may present with a variety of manifestations which include:Fever, sweats, chillsFatigue Loss of appetite, weight loss Nausea, vomiting Sore throat Diarrhoea Cough Shortness of breath Body rash Skin problems It is important to always keep in mind that all the above symptoms are non-specific and commonly occur in a variety of conditions. To establish a diagnosis of HIV/AIDS a blood test that has been confirmed is essential. A physical examination and other tests are necessary to rule out other illnesses.","Currently, there no cure for HIV / AIDS . Once you have the infection, your body can not get rid of it. However, there are many medications that can control HIV and prevent complications. These medications are called antiretroviral therapy (ART)."
Intrauterine-growth-retardation-(IUGR),"Intrauterine growth retardation, commonly known as IUGR, is a slower than average growth of the foetus inside the mother’s womb and may be due to a variety of reasons. Because of this arrest of foetal growth very early in its prenatal life, there is a reduction in the total number of cells which causes slow growth of the child in later life as well. The infant's weight is generally rated on a percentile scale which compares his weight with the normal average. The 100th percentile is when the child’s weight exactly matches the average. The lesser the percentile ranking of the infant’s weight, the lower the infant’s weight is as compared to the average. IUGR is defined as the condition when the baby’s weight is less than the 10th percentile (for that month of pregnancy), at birth.",IUGR may be suspected if the mother’s uterus is small or a small foetus is detected by the ultrasound scan. The mother may herself feel that the baby is not as big as it should be.,"There is no specific treatment for the condition. After birth, care is taken to provide a conducive atmosphere for the baby’s growth. A pregnant mother should gain adequate weight by consuming a healthy diet and avoiding alcohol and cigarettes."
Jaundice-in-the-newborn-baby,"Jaundice is a common condition in newborn infants that is commonly noticed shortly after birth. In most cases, it goes away on its own. Hence it is also called physiological jaundice.A baby has jaundice when bilirubin, a yellow pigment which is produced naturally by the body, builds up faster than the baby's liver can break it down and get rid of it in the baby's stool. Excessive bilirubin makes the baby's skin look yellow. The discolouration appears first on the face, then on the chest and stomach and, finally, on the legs. This happens because of one or more of the following reasons: The baby's developing liver is not yet able to remove the bilirubin from the blood. More bilirubin is being made than the liver can handle Too much of the bilirubin is reabsorbed from the intestines before the baby gets rid of it in the stool.",The primary symptom is yellowish discoloration of the white part of the eyes and skin in a newborn baby. Other symptoms may include excess sleepiness or poor feeding.,"Mild to moderate levels of jaundice do not require any treatment particularly if the baby was born at full term. If high levels of jaundice do not clear up on their own, the baby may be treated with special lights or other treatments. These special lights help get rid of the bilirubin by altering it chemically so that the baby's liver may be able to get rid of it easily. This treatment is called phototherapy and may require the baby to stay in the hospital for a few days.Rarely, babies may require treatment of their blood to remove bilirubin. In cases with very high bilirubin levels, a blood exchange is done to give the baby fresh blood and remove the bilirubin. Once the bilirubin level comes down, it is unlikely that it will increase again. However, if the child continues to look yellow after 3 weeks of life, the paediatrician should be consulted to determine if there is some other disease process causing jaundice."
Kidney-stones,"The urinary system is made up of the kidneys, the ureters, the bladder, and the urethra. The kidneys are the organs that get rid of our body waste in the form of urine. There are two kidneys, one on either side of the spine under the lower ribs. The ureters carry the urine from the kidneys to the bladder. Urine is stored in the urinary bladder until urination occurs. It passes out of the body through a tube called the urethra.Stones can form anywhere in the urinary system. They develop when certain chemicals in the urine form crystals that stick together. The crystals grow into a stone, which can range in size from a grain of sand to a golf ball. Small stones (usually measuring <5mm) can pass through the urinary system without causing too much problems. However, larger stones can block the flow of urine or irritate the lining of the urinary tract. Most stones (70 to 80 percent) contain calcium oxalate crystals. A smaller number of stones are made of uric acid or cystine.","Kidney stones may remain without any symptoms for a long time. They may present with episodes of severe pain that usually starts suddenly in the lower back under the ribs or in the lower abdomen, and moves to the groin. The pain, which is often associated with vomiting, may last for minutes or hours, followed by periods of relief. Its a flank pain. The stones may cause blood to appear in the urine. If there is associated urinary tract infection, there may be burning during urination associated with an urge to urinate.","Most small stones (measuring <5 mm in size) usually pass through the body by themselves within hours or a few days. Drinking lots of fluids helps this process. Certain types of stones can be dissolved using medications. However, the most common stones (those containing calcium) cannot be dissolved. Stones that do not pass by themselves and cause obstruction of the urinary tract with resulting symptoms of pain/discomfort or/ and swelling of the kidney and the related urinary tract treatment, do require intervention. One method of treatment is a non-surgical technique called Extra-corporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy (ESWL) that uses high-energy shock waves to break the stones into small fragments like sand. This stone dust then passes with urine during the next few weeks. This treatment can be successfully used in many cases where the stones are relatively small. The other method is by an operation that can be done either using the endoscope (ureteroscopy, nephroscopy) or by the standard open technique. More and more stones can now be treated without having to resort to an open operation."
Lung-Cancer,Primary lung cancer is the uncontrolled proliferation of malignant cells in the airways and air sacs of the lungs. Lung cancer is an aggressive cancer that can spread to other parts of the body.,"Some symptoms of lung cancer are general and might not come to a person’s notice immediately. It is only when the symptoms either worsen, or occur simultaneously that they are noticed. Some common symptoms are:","Since lung cancer tends to spread throughout the body, chemotherapy is the most common form of treatment. Chemotherapy drugs include doxorubicin or adriamycin, vincristine,and etoposide. Radiation therapy may be used if the exact area of the origin of the tumour is located."
Liver-Cancer,"Liver cancer is an abnormal, uncontrolled growth of cells in the liver. The liver is the largest internal organ of the body. It helps to regulate and store blood glucose (sugar). It helps get rid of drugs and toxins and produces important proteins. The liver also produces bile, which helps the body process fats and get rid of waste products. There are two types of liver cancer: primary and secondary. Primary liver cancer starts from the cells of the liver. The two most common forms of primary liver cancer are: Hepatoma, which is often associated with cirrhosis and hepatitis B or C infections Cholangiocarcinoma, a rare tumour developing in bile ducts cells. Secondary liver cancer occurs when a cancer starts someplace else and spreads to the liver. A secondary liver tumour may not be found until it causes symptoms. ", ,The treatment depends on the stage of the disease and whether it is primary or secondary liver cancer.
Lymphoma,"Lymphoma is the name for a group of cancers of the lymphatic system which defends the body against infections. The channels of the lymphatic system drain out excess fluid from the tissues into the blood stream. In case of invasion of the body by a foreign agent, lymph nodes or lymph glands allow the white blood cells to cluster around the foreign body and destroy it. Lymph nodes are bean shaped organs of the lymphatic system that are present in the neck or armpit area, upper thigh or groin and may become swollen during infection. The other organs of the lymphatic system are the spleen, appendix, tonsils and the bone marrow.",Both the types of lymphomas have some common symptoms:,"All patients with lymphoma need either radiation therapy or chemotherapy or a combination of both. In the former, the cancerous cells are killed with the help of deep X-ray radiation. In chemotherapy, powerful drugs like methotrexate, vincristine and cyclophophamide are used to kill the malignant cells. The choice of treatment depends on the location and extent of spread of the disease. Most patients with HD are able to lead a relatively disease-free life. Though NHL has a lower survival rate, therapy increases the life span considerably. However, recovery also depends on the stage at which the cancer is detected.In some cases, bone marrow transplants are done. Removal of the affected spleen is also done in some cases. After the treatment, patients are monitored for relapse of the condition. This monitoring decreases with time if the patient shows no symptoms of disease recurrence."
Leukemia,"Leukaemia is a type of cancer that affects the white blood cells called leukocytes. Blood contains three types of cells – red blood cells or RBC’s that carry oxygen, leukocytes or white blood cells, WBC’s that help to protect the body against infections and platelets cells that help in blood clotting. These blood cells are produced in the bone marrow that is present in the cavities in bones. The leukocytes are of different kinds and various types of leukaemia are named after the kind of leukocyte affected.","The symptoms in chronic forms of leukaemia may not appear for a long time and the person may be able to lead a normal life. However, acute leukaemia presents with symptoms like:", 
Leukaemia,"Leukaemia is a type of cancer that affects the white blood cells called leukocytes. Blood contains three types of cells – red blood cells or RBC’s that carry oxygen, leukocytes or white blood cells, WBC’s that help to protect the body against infections and platelets cells that help in blood clotting. These blood cells are produced in the bone marrow that is present in the cavities in bones. The leukocytes are of different kinds and various types of leukaemia are named after the kind of leukocyte affected.","The symptoms in chronic forms of leukaemia may not appear for a long time and the person may be able to lead a normal life. However, acute leukaemia presents with symptoms like: Fatigue associated with anaemia due to the lowered number of cells which carry oxygen Paleness of the face Continuous low grade fever Bleeding from gums or nose due to decrease in the number of platelets Vulnerability to infection due to lowered immunity Appearance of small red marks or petechiae (blood clots in the skin) Abnormal menstruation in women Unexpected loss of weight with loss of appetite.","The treatment of leukaemia usually involves intensive chemotherapy using drugs that kill the cancerous cells. The drugs are given as injections into the veins or by mouth; they are given at regular intervals over a period of time. They are very powerful and result in loss of hair and symptoms like nausea and loss of appetite. In some cases of leukaemia, especially in children, bone marrow transplant may be done. This is an expensive procedure where a person’s diseased marrow is replaced by a healthy marrow from a matching donor. This matching is very important since the body rejects foreign marrow very easily."
Low-Blood-Pressure,"Normal blood pressure is 120/80 mm hg where 120 is the systolic pressure and 80 is the diastolic pressure. Low blood pressure is an abnormal condition where a person's blood pressure is much lower than usual, which can cause symptoms such as dizziness or lightheadedness. When the blood pressure is too low, there is inadequate blood flow to the heart, brain, and other vital organs. A blood pressure level that is borderline low for one person may be normal for another. The most important factor is how the blood pressure changes from the normal condition. Most normal blood pressures fall in the range of 90/60 mm Hg to 130/80 mm Hg, but a significant change, even as little as 20 mm Hg, can cause problems for some people.",Symptoms of low BP may include: Tiredness General weakness Light-headedness and fainting Blurred vision Dizziness Palpitations Confusion Nausea Temporary loss of consciousness.,"Low blood pressure or hypotension may or may not require treatment. The treatment of hypotension is directed toward the underlying cause. Checking whether you are drinking enough and are not dehydrated may be important. If an underlying disorder, such as a heart condition is suspected then it may be advisable to go to hospital for tests and treatment. If medications are suspected of causing hypotension the doctor will probably advise a change of drug or dosage. Bed rest and assistance with daily activities are needed until the condition improves."
Meningitis,"The brain and the spinal cord are covered by a thin layer called meninges. Meningitis is an infection of the meninges and is caused by a virus or bacterium. Bacterial meningitis (caused by bacteria), can be quite severe and may result in brain damage, hearing loss, or learning disability.     ","Patients with meningitis suddenly develop fever, headache, and stiffness of the neck. There may also be nausea and vomiting, and the patients may become confused or are difficult to awaken. In severe meningitis, the meningeal infection may subsequently involve the blood vessels which may get blocked. This leads to damage to the part of the brain supplied by those blood vessels and can cause paralysis, fits and symptoms like that. Similarly meningitis can involve the nerves coming out of the brain, resulting in squint, visual failure and face paralysis.","Patients with bacterial meningitis need to be admitted to the hospital. The disease can be treated with a number of effective antibiotics. It is important, however, that treatment be started early in the course of the disease. Appropriate antibiotic treatment should reduce the risk of death to below 15%, although the risk is higher among the elderly. Usually more than one antibiotic is needed, and these are administered through injections into the veins (intravenous). The antibiotics are required for 7-21 days depending on the bacterium that causes it. For chronic (long term) meningitis, the treatment is much longer, for example, tuberculosis meningitis requires treatment for 9 months or longer. Besides antibiotics, proper nursing care is very important."
Mental-Retardation,"Mental retardation (MR) has been defined as below average general intellectual functioning with associated deficits in adaptive behaviour that occurs before the age of 18 years. It is classified on the basis of the individual's IQ level: Profound MR -> IQ = 0-24 Severe MR -> IQ = 25-40 Moderate MR -> IQ = 40-54 Mild MR -> IQ = 55-69 Borderline MR -> IQ = 70-84IQ is a measure of intellectual functioning as it measures an individual's mental age against his actual chronological age. IQ = mental age/chronological age multiplied by 100. It is a ratio of the child's mental age relative to his birth age in years.Though IQ is taken as the main indicator of mental retardation, there have to be serious limitations in the way a child adjusts to the social environment, for him to be diagnosed as intellectually impaired. Mental retardation is now variously referred to as cognitive (mental) deficit and intellectual impairment.","The symptoms for intellectual retardation are not well defined since they vary with the severity of the condition. Children with mild intellectual deficits are generally not spotted till they begin school. The most common indicator of impaired mental functioning is the child's underperformance at school. The child may show behaviour not appropriate for his age, may have a decreased learning ability and may not be curious about things around him. Children with severe forms of intellectual disability may have trouble taking care of their daily needs and may require adult help. Almost all children with mental deficits show delayed developmental milestones, in that they sit and stand later than normal children and may also acquire speech later.","There is no medical treatment for intellectual impairment since it is not a disease condition. Treatment strategy involves rehabilitation of the child and making him acquire adaptive skills for everyday life. Special schools provide individualised education to these children, so that they are able to acquire knowledge at their own pace. Apart from academic knowledge, special education also provides these children with the requisite skills so that they are able to adjust in society. Specific treatment measures like behaviour therapy are used to reduce socially unacceptable behaviour of these children. For example, children with intellectual impairment may have a very low attention span and thus may disrupt their surroundings. Therapy helps to reduce such behaviour.Integrated education is a common approach being applied in case of intellectual impairment in recent times. In this approach, cognitively deficient children are taught with non-disabled children in normal classrooms, but, some skills are imparted to them separately. This helps to give these children the best of both worlds. Children with intellectual impairment are different from their peers in that they need more individual attention than other children. However, they need as much love and support as other children do. With early intervention, most children are able to live efficient and satisfactory lives."
Migraine,"Migraine is a neurological disorder that is characterised by severe and recurring headaches, often on one side of the head. The pain may be accompanied by nausea, vomiting or neurological symptoms such as flashing lights or tingling on the face and limbs. The patient feels discomfort in bright light and in loud sound areas. The pain may last from 4-72 hours, and may range from a sharp shooting pain to a dull ache. Though the attacks may begin at any age, young women are most susceptible.","Though every individual may experience different symptoms, most people have a warning period or ‘aura’ before the onset of the actual headache. Symptoms of an aura include: Numbness or tingling of the face or arm. Usually this moves over one side of the body over 20 to 30 minutes. Blurred vision or silvery zigzag lines moving across the field of vision from one side to the other over 15-20 minutes (fortification spectra) Confusion or disorientation Depression Pain that worsens with physical activity Pain that hinders your regular daily activities Nausea with or without vomiting Extreme sensitivity to light (photophobia) and sound (sonophobia); even a small sound may irritate the patient. Patients, during a migraine attack, may retire to a dark, silent room during an attack. IrritabilityNot all migraine headaches are the same. Most people suffer from migraines without auras, which were previously called common migraines. Some have migraines with auras, which were previously called classic migraines. If you're in the second group, you'll likely have auras about 15 to 30 minutes before your headache begins. They may continue after your headache starts or even occur after your headache begins. These may include: Sparkling flashes of light Dazzling zigzag lines in your field of vision Slowly spreading blind spots in your vision Tingling, pins-and-needles sensations in one arm or leg Rarely, weakness or language and speech problems","Treatment for migraine is aimed at providing immediate relief from pain in the attack. For this, drugs that constrict the blood vessels (sumatriptan or ergotamine), nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen, aspirin and naproxen, are prescribed. For best results, take pain-relieving drugs as soon as you experience signs or symptoms of a migraine headache. It may help if you rest or sleep in a dark room after taking them: Other pain-relievers like analgesics such as paracetamol with anti-nausea medications such as metoclopramide may be used too.Preventive medications can reduce the frequency, severity and length of migraines and may increase the effectiveness of pain-relieving medicines used during migraine attacks. Drugs that work in this way include propanolol (a ""beta-blocker""), pizotifen, sodium valproate and some types of anti-depressants (TRI-cyclics). These drugs are taken continuously rather just during an attack. Certain antidepressants are good at helping prevent all types of headaches, including migraines. These medications are considered among first-line treatment agents and may reduce migraines by affecting the level of serotonin and other brain chemicals. Newer antidepressants, however, generally aren't as effective for migraine prevention.Since a migraine attack cannot be totally avoided, the patient should take care that of the precipitating factors are reduced to the minimum. They must avoid foods that trigger an attack. Regular exercises and stress management are helpful."
Measles,"Measles is a highly infectious disease caused by a virus. Before measles immunization was widely available, it used to be a significant cause of childhood illness and death. Measles is often confused with other viral fevers accompanied with rash by the elders in the household. In North India it is generally referred to as “khasra”. All fevers accompanied by rash are not measles.","Measles is characterised by sudden onset of high grade fever accompanied by cough, runny nose, watering of eyes and the appearance of a typical rash on the 3rd, 4th or 5th day of the fever, which typically gradually progresses from the upper body and face down to the feet. The fever normally subsides only when the rash has reached the feet on the 6th or 7th day of illness. Health professionals learn to recognise the illness by the presence of typical salt grain like spots on the inner side of the cheeks called “Koplik's spots”. These may, however, be absent in some cases. The Doctor must be consulted immediately if one of the following occurs: Rapid breathing with flaring of nostrils and persistent coughing Refusal to eat or drink leading to reduction in urine output. Severe ear pain or discharge from the ears. Very high temperature or if the fever does not subside by the 7th day of illness Severe hoarseness of voice Delirium, fits and change in alertness.","The child is kept comfortable in a cool room, with comfortable loose cotton clothing. Fever is treated with acetaminophen or paracetamol, or ibuprofen. Aspirin is not prescribed in children. Fluids are encouraged so that hydration and urine output are maintained. Normally antibiotics are not given but complications such as chest infections, ear infections or throat infection (laryngitis) are treated with appropriate antibiotics. Vitamin supplements especially extra Vitamin A is usually given."
Nausea,"Nausea is an urge to vomit or a general uneasiness in the stomach. Almost everyone experiences nausea at sometime in life. Nausea is not a disease, but rather a symptom of many disorders.","Nausea is itself a symptom as already defined above. The symptoms include distaste for food, discomfort in upper abdomen, vomiting, which may sometimes be very forceful and the patient may retch. Additional symptoms may include sweating, diarrhoea and dizziness.","Treatment is decided depending upon the symptoms and causes of the condition. Medicines that are most commonly prescribed are chewable antacids to neutralise the acid in the stomach. Some drugs called anti-emetics, may help reduce nausea. There are some ways of preventing nausea. Prevention is related to its cause. Following some basic guidelines can prevent it: Eating small meals at a time Avoiding any irritating odours such as perfumes, smoke or fuel Avoiding alcohol If the nausea is due to morning sickness during pregnancy, avoiding fatty foods can help."
Ovarian-Cancer,"Ovarian cancer is the uncontrolled malignant growth of cells in the ovarian tissue. The ovaries are almond shaped organs in the lower part of the woman's abdomen which produce ova and female hormones. Though ovarian cancer is an uncommon form of cancer, it usually occurs in women older than 50 years. This form of cancer is often called the ""silent killer"" because the symptoms fail to show up until a late stage of the disease. Also since the ovaries are located deep inside the abdomen, they are not easily accessible for examination.Cancer of the ovary starts most often in the cells lining the organ than in the internal cells or the eggs. Almost 90% of the cases are when the malignancy begins in these covering cells. In the remaining 10% cases the cancer either starts in the cells that later become the eggs, or in the cells that connect the ovaries to the surrounding tissues. Not all ovarian tumours are cancerous. Many lumps in the ovary may be benign. Some cancers spread very fast, while others are easier to control. If the cancerous cells enter the blood stream they can then form tumours anywhere in the body.","The symptoms of ovarian cancer are often not manifested early in the disease. They may also be so vague in the earlier stages, that they can easily be ignored but should not be. Some of the common symptoms are: Stomach ache and abdominal discomfort accompanied by a feeling of bloatedness or fullness of the stomach.","The treatment depends on the type and stage of the tumour. Surgery is usually the first and preferred method of treatment. This includes removal of the ovaries (oophorectomy), the fallopian tubes (salpingectomy), the cervix and the uterus (hysterectomy). Chemotherapy is the destruction of the cancerous cells with the help of drugs and special medications. Most drugs used to treat cancer are given intravenously. The common drugs are taxol, taxatere, cisplatin and paraplatin. Radiation therapy involves the use of high energy rays to kill the cancerous cells. However, it is not the preferred method of treatment since it's effect is localised and the cancer may have spread through the blood stream."
Oral-Cancer,"Oral cancers are the single most common group of cancers in any region in the body among Indians. They include cancers of the lips, cheeks, tongue and jawbones, the pharynx (throat) and the larynx (voice box).","Oral cancers are more common in males. The symptoms due to these cancers include non-healing ulcers in the oral cavity, bleeding from the mouth, increasing swelling in or around the mouth, white or red patches in the mouth, difficulty or pain during swallowing, a change in voice or hoarseness, and difficulty in breathing. Any person who has one or more of these symptoms should consult his physician.","Most cancers of the head and neck are treated by a combination of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy. In early stages, surgery may be curative. Unfortunately, surgery may be mutilating and may need extensive plastic surgery for reconstruction. "
Osteoarthritis,"Osteoarthritis is the commonest chronic disorder involving the joints. It is also called degenerative arthritis as it is related to the ageing process. In normal life, joint surface is covered with soft and very smooth bone that is called cartilage. In normal health it provides elastic tissue or padding in joints that act as a smooth cushioning material inside joints, and prevents bones from rubbing together with friction-free movement of the joints. However, with decades of use of joints, often with their misuse (wrong postures, burdening them with excess weight etc.) joint cartilage gets damaged, develops cracks, and becomes rough and flaky so that small pieces of damaged cartilage start to break off. With time, large sections of cartilage may get worn out completely, leaving the bone ends unprotected so that the rough surfaces rub against each other and cause painful joints. There are several factors, which contribute to the painful movements. One of these factors is thickening of the bone ends. The capsule surrounding the joint may also thicken. In addition, bony growths called “spurs”, or osteophytes form at various places in the joint. Finally, bits of bone and cartilage may break off and float in the joint space, resulting in painful movement of the joint and may even cause ‘locking’ of the joint.","The most common symptom of osteoarthritis is mild to severe pain in the joint. Initially the pain usually occurs following activity, and rest provides relief. In the later stages, pain occurs with minimum movement and even at or after rest. There may also be swelling and stiffness of the joints, which occurs especially in the morning or after a period of inactivity. Other symptoms include weakness in the muscles around the affected joints due to lack of use, deformity of the joint and a creaking or grating sound in the joint.","The treatment is directed towards reducing pain, keeping the joint moving and preventing further damage. Medicines like ibuprofen, diclofenac and other newer non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) called coxibs, are used primarily to relieve pain and reduce stiffness. Certain ointments and oils are also beneficial if applied regularly.Physiotherapy including exercise, heat or cold compresses, and soaking in warm water are also beneficial. Exercise is an important complement of treatment. In the beginning, the patient should do light exercise and gradually increase the intensity and the duration of the exercise. In the beginning it is advisable to carry out physiotherapy under guidance of an expert. The patient may need to modify the diet if obesity or overweight is one of the causes of the disease.Surgery can be helpful when other treatments fail to help the patient. But one should consider surgery only when pain and disability seriously interfere with daily living. Surgery can also be helpful in end stage osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. Surgery for osteoarthritis involves joint replacement, following which the patient requires to stay in the hospital for a few days."
Oral-cavity-and-oropharyngeal-cancer,"In India, squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region accounts for 12% of all malignancies. Male to female ratios are greater than 2:1, especially in laryngeal cancers where the ratio is more than 4-5 times the normal ratio.Oral cavity includes the lips and its inside lining, cheeks and their inner lining, teeth, gums, floor of mouth below the tongue, bony roof of mouth, area behind the wisdom teeth and the front two thirds of tongue.Oropharynx includes the back one third of tongue, tonsils, tonsillar pillar, soft palate and the back wall of the throat visible to the eye. Any cancer, which arises in these areas, is known as oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer.","A sore or lesion in the mouth that does not heal A feeling that something is caught in the throat that does not go away Difficulty moving the jaw or tongue Numbness of any area in the mouth Pain in the mouth that does not go away Difficulty chewing or swallowing A lump or mass in the neck A persistent lump or thickening in the cheek Development of asymmetry, in the tonsils","After the cancer is staged treatment choices are provided. It is important to take time and think about the choices including the chances of cure, impact of treatment on speech, swallowing and respiration.The treatment options are surgery, radiation therapy and chemotherapy. These are given alone or in combination depending on the stage of the cancer. Head and neck surgery often changes the patient’s ability to chew, swallow or talk. The face and neck may be swollen and also parts of the neck may be numb because nerves have been cut.Radiotherapy involves use of high energy x-rays to kill cancer cells. It often causes unwanted side effects like redness, irritation of eyes and mouth, dryness of mouth, alteration in taste, thick saliva, decreased appetite etc.Chemotherapy is used to kill cancer cells throughout the body. In cancer of the oral cavity it is used in conjunction with surgery or radiation therapy as its effect alone is dismissal."
Pancreatic-Cancer,"The pancreas is a gland that is located in the upper part of the abdomen behind the stomach and produces a hormone called insulin. This hormone helps in maintaining the blood glucose level. The pancreas also produce certain enzymes that help the body to digest food. Cancer that begins in the cells of the pancreas is called pancreatic cancer. It usually begins in the channels that carry pancreatic juices. This type is called Exocrine Pancreatic Cancer. In another form, the cancer begins in the cells that produce insulin and is called Islet cell Pancreatic Cancer. Cancer of the pancreas is an uncommon form of cancer. Unfortunately, the outcome of this cancer is not very good.",Cancer of the pancreas usually spreads to the surrounding areas unless diagnosed and treated early. The early symptoms are not specific and may point towards many other conditions. This is why the diagnosis is often delayed. The first noticeable symptom in most cases is unexplained weight loss. Other symptoms may include:,"The treatment varies depending upon the extent of the disease. Surgery may be done in case the tumour is localised and the cancer has not spread to other areas. The removal of the pancreas can also be total or partial. In total pancreatectomy, the entire pancreas is removed in addition to the duodenum, the bile duct, gallbladder, spleen and the lymph nodes in the area. In partial removal, only the affected part of the organ is removed. In some cases, the tumour is too large to be removed. In such cases, a bypass is created around the blockage to relieve the symptoms such as jaundice, nausea and vomiting. Chemotherapy is another method of treatment where the cancerous cells are destroyed with the help of chemicals. This treatment is usually given in cycles to allow the body to recover before the next dose. Chemotherapy is a systemic form of therapy which means that the drugs are given into the vein and flow through the blood stream. Radiation therapy is also used for treatment. In this form, cancerous cells are destroyed with the help of powerful radiation. However, this method has certain side effects since some non-cancerous cells may also be destroyed in the process. Doctors may also use this form of treatment to shrink the tumour in size before the surgery. It may also be used in combination with chemotherapy."
Prostate-Cancer,"The incidence of prostatic cancer increases with advancing age to the extent that if one were to live long enough without any other disease, one would eventually die of prostate cancer. It rarely occurs in men below 45 years.","The symptoms are quite similar to those with BPH (i.e. poor urinary stream, frequent urination and obstruction to urine flow), as in this condition also the gland enlarges and presses on the urethra. There may be, in addition, loss of appetite and loss of weight. If the cancer has spread, there may be pain in the spine or back or in advanced cases, in the lower abdomen or even around the rectum.","If the disease is localized to the prostate gland, the entire prostate can be removed surgically (radical prostatectomy). This is a major operation performed under general anaesthesia and the recovery period is prolonged. Blood transfusions are required and in some cases there may be loss of control over urination or even impotence. The other form of treatment is radiotherapy, in which deep penetrating X-rays are used to burn the cancer cells of the prostate. This treatment is given over several weeks and may be associated with side effects like pain, diarrhoea, bleeding from the rectum or in the urine, lower abdominal discomfort and, rarely, impotence.If the disease is advanced or comes back after initial treatment (recurrence) then hormonal control of the disease is attempted. The aim is to deprive the tumour cells of the male sex hormone, testosterone. This is achieved by using medicines like goserelin or by removing both the testes of the patient (orchidectomy)."
Prostate-enlargement,"The Prostate is a small gland located just below the urinary bladder in males. It fits around the urethra, a tube that serves as a conduit for the passage of urine and semen. The prostate produces a fluid that forms one of the constituents of the semen.","The prostate usually grows very slowly and for several years there may be no symptoms. Indeed the symptoms may become quite severe, yet the person may not notice and accept them as normal. The common symptoms are: The urine stream may become weak The flow starts after a period of waiting - hesitancy The person may need to go to the toilet frequently He may have to get up several times at night to pass urine There may be dribbling of urine or it may come in stops and starts Occasionally there may be an urgent, uncontrollable desire to pass urine, sometimes leading to leakage If the prostate becomes very large the patient may present with complete blockage, and retention of urine. This may happen so slowly that the patient passes a small quantity at a time while retaining the rest of the urine in the bladder which holds over 500 ml urine all the time – an event called chronic retention.","There are several ways of treating prostatic enlargement. The selected modality depends on several factors like the age of the patient, his general health, severity of symptoms and his life style. The decision is made by the patient’s own perception of symptoms, measurement of the degree of obstruction and the presence or absence of complications.Medical treatment:If the symptoms are minimal, no treatment may be given or medicines may be tried at first. The medicines include prazocin, terazocin, tamsulosin and finasteride which help by relaxing the prostatic muscle or by causing its shrinkage. The medicines may need to be given for several weeks or months. Once the medicines are stopped, the symptoms commonly return. Some of the side effects of these medicines include headaches, dizziness, lowering of blood pressure and loss of libido.Surgical treatment:This is the favoured method of treatment if the symptoms are significant. It is usually performed using an instrument that is passed up the urethra and the prostate gland is cut out from within. This procedure is called transurethral resection of prostate (TURP) and is the most frequently performed operation for prostatic enlargement, in fact it is the gold standard of surgical treatment. Any other endoscopic operation is either inadequate or is still experimental. Open operation by making a cut in the abdomen is almost never required. The cutting of the prostate gland in the TURP is done by using an electric current. The operation is performed under regional anaesthesia i.e. by numbing the lower part of the body by injecting an anaesthetic agent into the spine. The operation usually lasts 1 hour. Laser prostatectomy is still under development and till date TURP is the surgery of choice."
Prostatitis,"Prostatitis is the inflammation of the prostate gland. The prostate is a small gland, the size of a walnut present only in males, and situated just below the urinary bladder.","The acute symptoms may be fever and chills, pain in the low back, in the testes or scrotum. There may be pain or burning on passing urine accompanied by frequent urination. In chronic prostatitis, the symptoms are less prominent. There may be only persistent low back pain or discomfort while passing urine. Occasionally there may be discomfort during ejaculation and even blood in the semen.","Antibiotics like norfloxacin are prescribed and continued for 10 to 14 days. In some cases the antibiotics may need to be given for a longer duration. Pain relieving medicines and anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen may also be prescribed. In non-bacterial prostatitis, it may not be necessary to give antibiotics. In chronic cases, it is often extremely difficult to eradicate the infection completely and relapses may occur."
Polio,"Poliomyelitis or polio, is an infection caused by the poliovirus leading to nerve damage and muscle paralysis. Transmission of the poliovirus occurs by contact with infected secretions from the nose and throat (airborne), or contact by the faeces (faeco-oral). The virus enters mouth and nose, multiplies in the throat or digestive tract, and spreads through the blood to the rest of the body.","Polio occurs in three forms: abortive, nonparalytic, and paralytic.Abortive form is the most common and is a brief febrile illness that may go unnoticed. Symptoms are nonspecific and may include:Fever, sore throat, headache and muscle ache Malaise, general discomfort or uneasiness Loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting and constipationIn cases of nonparalytic poliomyelitis, the symptoms last one to two weeks and include:Moderate fever (38-390C) and headache Anxiety and excessive sweating Nausea and vomiting and constipation Excessive tiredness, weakness and irritability Soreness or stiffness of the muscles of back, arms, legs, and abdomen Muscle tenderness and spasm in any part of the bodyIn about one-third of cases this resolves in a week without developing paralysis. Approximately two thirds of these children have a short symptom free interlude between minor and major (CNS) illnesses. The symptoms in cases of paralytic polio are:Fever, headache, irritability and stiff neck and back Rapid onset of weakness of one or more muscle groups leading to paralysis of any part of the body. Paralysis typically begins during fever. It is often the first symptom. Pattern of paralysis is asymmetrical involving usually only one limb, lower extremities more than upper extremities. Paralysed muscles atrophy over time. Abnormal (but not loss of) sensation: sensitivity to touch, mild touch may be painful Difficulty in passing urine Constipation and feeling of bloatedness in the abdomen Difficulty in swallowing and breathing Occasionally rapid deterioration with drowsiness, respiratory failure and sudden collapse.","The aims of management are to allay fear, minimize skeletal deformities, anticipate and prevent complications and prepare the child and family for a prolonged treatment of the disability. Abortive and nonparalytic forms are treated similarly. They usually get better after few days of bed rest. The treatment generally includes pain relievers to treat the muscle spasm and pain, antipyretics for fever and sedatives with good diet. Avoid exertion for the next two weeks. Hot packs (warm water fomentation) for 10-15 minutes every 2-4 hours can relieve muscle stiffness and spasm. A child with paralytic form of disease during acute stage requires complete bed rest. Stress on the affected muscles should be avoided. Massage and injections are contraindicated. Positioning of limbs using sand bags, splints or footboards helps in relaxation of affected muscles. Passive movements of joints within the range of pain are allowed. Hospitalisation is necessary for progressive paralysis, breathing difficulty and worsening sensorium. Once the virus is no longer active, physical therapy can improve muscle function."
Priapism,"Priapism is a state of continued painful erection of the penis for more than four hours, without any sexual stimulation. It is a condition in which the erection is due to an abnormal quantity of blood in the penis, which makes it swollen and tender, and does not improve after ejaculation.When the condition is caused due to a decreased flow of blood to the penis, it is called ‘low-flow priapism’. When it is caused due to an injury to the region, it is called ‘high-flow priapism’.The condition is more common in children in the age group of 5-10 years and adults between the ages of 20-50 years. Once initiated, priapism gets worse with time so immediate help must be sought by the patient.",The main symptom is erection of the penis for a long time without any sexual stimulation or desire. This is associated with pain and tenderness in the penis.,"Effective treatment of the condition depends on the time that has elapsed since its origin. The more time taken by the patient to seek treatment, the more difficult it is to treat the condition. In most cases, the doctor prescribes decongestant medications to help the excess blood to flow out of the penis. The doctor may also evacuate the blood from the organ by a process called aspiration. In this procedure, a needle is inserted into the penis and excess blood is drained out. A similar procedure called shunting can also be performed, a minor surgical procedure. In this, holes are made in the penile tissue and blood is drained out into the surrounding veins."
Premenstrual-Syndrome-(PMS),"Mood swings, tender breasts, a swollen abdomen, food cravings, fatigue, irritability and depression. Women who experience some or all of these problems in the days before their monthly periods may have the premenstrual syndrome (PMS).An estimated 70 to 90 percent of menstruating women experience some form of premenstrual syndrome. These problems trouble women in their 20s and 30s and they tend to recur in a predictable pattern. Yet the physical and emotional changes one experiences with premenstrual syndrome might be more or less intense with each menstrual cycle.","The signs and symptoms of premenstrual syndrome are uncomfortable and unwelcome part of a woman’s monthly menstrual cycle. The most common physical and emotional symptoms associated with premenstrual syndrome include: Weight gain from fluid retention Abdominal bloating Breast tenderness Tension or anxiety Depressed mood Crying spells Mood swings and irritability or anger Appetite changes and food cravings Trouble falling asleep (insomnia) Joint or muscle pain Headache Fatigue For an estimated 30 to 40 percent women, the physical pain and emotional stress are severe enough to affect their daily routines and activities. Most of these symptoms disappear as the menstrual period begins.In some women the symptoms are so severe that they are considered disabling. This form of PMS has its own psychiatric designation — premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). PMDD is a severe form of premenstrual syndrome with symptoms including severe depression, feelings of hopelessness, anger, anxiety, low self-esteem, difficulty concentrating, irritability and tension. About 50 to 60 percent of women with severe PMS may have an underlying psychiatric disorder.","The doctor may prescribe one or more medications for premenstrual syndrome. The success of medications in relieving symptoms varies from woman to woman. Commonly prescribed medications for premenstrual syndrome include: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Taken before or at the onset of the period. NSAIDs such as ibuprofen or naproxen sodium can ease cramping and breast discomfort. Oral contraceptives. These stop ovulation and stabilize hormonal swings, thereby offering relief from PMS symptoms. Antidepressants. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which include fluoxetine, paroxetine and sertraline, have been successful in reducing symptoms such as fatigue, food cravings and sleep problems. These drugs are generally taken daily. But for some women with PMS, use of antidepressants may be limited to the two weeks before menstruation begins. Medroxyprogesterone acetate. For severe PMS or PMDD, this injection can be used to temporarily stop ovulation. However, this may cause an increase in some signs and symptoms of PMS, such as increased appetite, weight gain, headache and depressed mood. Treatment for PMDD is similar to that of premenstrual syndrome, but may be more intense."
Pancreatitis,Pancreas is an organ behind the stomach and its swelling is known as pancreatitis. The pancreas produces digestive enzymes (chemicals needed to break down food) and insulin (which regulates the level of glucose in the blood). The digestive enzymes flow into the small intestine but insulin is released directly into the blood. Acute pancreatitis occurs as a sudden episode after which the pancreas usually returns to its normal condition. Chronic pancreatitis means an ongoing inflammation/swelling in the pancreas leading to permanent damage.,"The main symptom is severe pain in the stomach (precisely the middle of upper abdomen). It generally spreads to the back and chest, becoming worse on walking or lying down, and lessens on sitting or leaning forward. It may be associated with profuse vomiting. Pain often occurs 12 to 24 hours after a large meal or heavy drinking.Severe cases may have signs of shock, like restlessness, fast heartbeat, disorientation and cold, and sweaty extremities. Call the doctor immediately if these symptoms are present along with severe pain in the abdomen.","Pancreatitis usually requires rest and stay in the hospital. To decrease the amount of pancreatic enzymes, avoid eating or drinking anything for some time. Intravenous (IV) fluids are given through the vein. A nasogastric tube may be put through the nose into the stomach to remove fluids and prevent nausea and vomiting. A pain reliever will be given for the pain. Medication to reduce the flow of pancreatic enzymes may be given. Clear liquids may be taken later, gradually progressing to a diet of low-fat foods when the pain stops. Most people on treatment start feeling better in a couple of days and usually go home in a week. Severe disease requires treatment in an intensive care unit (ICU) and a hospital stay of several weeks."
Refractive-errors,"The light rays that enter our eyes are bent or ""refracted"", so that they focus onto the retina. The retina is the light-sensitive layer of the eye that transmits the image of the visual world to the brain. This bending of light occurs across all the transparent structures of the eye but in particular, across the cornea and lens. If the degree of bending is not correct, then the image that is formed on the retina is not focused and the picture appears blurred. This is the basis of a refractive error and may require eye glasses or other optical correction.","Blurred vision.Reading problem.Inability to see close objects.Eye irritation or weakness in the eyes.In children, there are initial signs such as crossed eyes (when eyes are not aligned properly), continuous blinking of the eyes, rubbing of the eyes, and frowning while reading.Advanced signs include, headaches due to stress on vascular eye muscle, squinting of eyes, eye fatigues, different sensation, or excessive itchiness in your eyes.","Some of this has been touched on above. It is important to first identify the nature of the refractive error, which the ophthalmologist (eye specialist) can easily do. There are several options available. These are - eye glasses, contact lenses and corrective(refractive) surgery.Eyeglasses - this is the traditional method for correcting refractive errors. Glasses can also protect the eyes against harmful ultraviolet rays. Glasses may need to be changed at regular intervals if the refractive error changes. Bifocal glasses are those that have two lenses- the one on top for distant vision and a segment below for reading and other near tasks.Contact lenses - A wide variety of lenses are now available and provide a good alternative for the traditional glasses. The various options must be discussed with the prescribing doctor so that the lens that suits an individual's life style and other requirements can be prescribed. Contact lenses may not suit some persons, particularly those exposed to dusty and dry conditions and others with allergies. Careful hygiene is necessary in handling contact lenses to reduce the risks of infection.Refractive surgery - These surgical procedures are not for every person with a refractive error. Eyeglasses or contact lenses are a better and safer option. Refractive surgery is sometimes advised for patients who have difficulties with the other methods of correction or where their life style so demands. These procedures include radial keratotomy (RK), photorefractive (excimer laser) keratoplasty (PRK), LASIK and intra-ocular corneal rings. In these procedures cuts are made in the cornea using a laser, sometimes combined with other techniques, to change its shape and allow the light to be more accurately focused on the retina."
Retinal-detachment,A retinal detachment is a medical emergency requiring immediate treatment. In this separation of the light sensitive membrane in the back of the eye (retina) becomes separated from its supporting layers (the outermost pigment layer).,"Retinal detachment causes a sudden defect in vision; it appears as though a shadow has fallen across the eye. There may be bright flashes of light, in the peripheral areas of vision. Sometimes, translucent specks of various shapes (floaters) are seen in the eye. The vision may become blurred.","The treatment of retinal detachment is by surgery. Several procedures are available. Laser can be used to seal the tears or holes in the retina that generally precede retinal detachment. The application of intense cold with an ice probe (known as cryopexy) leads to the formation of a scar that holds the retina to the underlying layer. Surgical reattachment involves indentation of the sclera to relieve pressure on the retina, allowing it to re-attach. This procedure is called scleral buckling.Sometimes, the eye may have to be entered to pump in air or gas to force the retina outward against the sclera. This is called pneumatic retinopexy, can generally be done under local anaesthesia and causes minimum discomfort. Sixty to 90% patients with retinal detachment can be treated by this method. If these methods are unsuccessful, or if there is disease in the vitreous, the vitreous may have to be removed and replaced with saline through a procedure called vitrectomy."
Rheumatic-heart-disease,"Rheumatic heart disease is a condition in which the heart valves (flap-like structures which prevent the blood from flowing backwards) are damaged by a disease process that begins with a throat infection caused by the streptococcal bacteria. If not treated this throat infection leads to rheumatic fever, repeated episodes of which may cause rheumatic heart disease.Rheumatic fever is an inflammatory disease that affects the connective tissues of the body-especially those of the heart, the joints, the brain or the skin. When rheumatic fever permanently damages the heart, the condition is called rheumatic heart disease.People of all ages can suffer from acute rheumatic fever, but it usually occurs in children five to fifteen years old.","They are: Fever Swollen, tender, red and painful joints-particularly the knees, ankles, elbows, or wrists Nodules or lumps over swollen joints Uncontrolled movements of arms, legs, or muscles of the face Weakness and shortness of breath.","The doctor determines the specific treatment based on the overall health, medical history, and the extent of the disease.Since rheumatic fever is the cause of the heart disease, the best treatment is to prevent rheumatic fever from occurring. Penicillin and other antibiotics can usually treat strep throat (a streptococcus A bacteria infection). Patients who have previously suffered from rheumatic fever are often given continuous (daily or monthly) antibiotic treatments, possibly for life, to prevent future attacks of rheumatic fever and lower the risk of heart damage.In severe cases of heart valve damage, valve replacement surgery may be recommended. In such a surgery the damaged heart valve is replaced with an artificial valve made of metal or plastic, or with a specially prepared valve from an animal such as pig. Most patients improve markedly after the replacement surgery."
Rubella-(German-Measles),"TORCH is an acronym for a special group of infections. These may be acquired by a woman during pregnancy. ""TORCH"" stands for the following infections: Toxoplasma infection, also called toxoplasmosis Other infections, such as hepatitis B, syphilis, and herpes zoster, (the virus that causes chickenpox) Rubella, the virus that causes German measles Cytomegalovirus, or CMV Herpes simplex virus, the cause of genital herpes","The signs and symptoms of rubella are so mild that they're hard to notice, especially in children. The signs and symptoms generally appear between two and three weeks after the exposure to the virus. They last for about two to three days and may include: Mild fever Headache Stuffy or runny nose Inflamed, red eyes Enlarged, tender lymph nodes at the base of the skull, the back of the neck and behind the ears Pink rash that begins on the face and quickly spreads to the trunk and then to the arms and legs, before disappearing in the same sequence Aching joints, especially in young women","No treatment can shorten the course of rubella infection. Most of the time the symptoms are so mild that treatment usually isn't necessary. However, doctors often recommend isolation from others — especially pregnant women — during the infectious period.If a woman contracts rubella while she is pregnant, she should discuss the risks to the baby with the doctor. If the woman wishes to continue her pregnancy, she may be given antibodies called hyperimmune globulin that can fight off the infection. This can reduce the symptoms but does not eliminate the possibility of the baby developing congenital rubella syndrome. Treatment for congenital rubella syndrome varies depending on the extent of the infant's problems. Children with multiple complications may require early treatment from specialists."
Sexually-Transmitted-Infections,"STIs are infections that one gets by having sexual intercourse (vaginal, oral or anal) with someone who already has an STI. There are more than 30 different sexually transmissible bacteria, viruses and parasites. Several, in particular HIV and syphilis, can also be transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy and childbirth, and through blood products and tissue transfer.",Sores or bumps on the genitals or in the oral or rectal area.Painful or burning urination.Discharge from the penis.Unusual or odd-smelling vaginal discharge.Unusual vaginal bleeding.Pain during sex.,"Antibiotics. Antibiotics, often in a single dose, can cure many sexually transmitted bacterial and parasitic infections, including gonorrhea, syphilis, chlamydia and trichomoniasis. ...Antiviral drugs. If you have herpes or HIV , you will be prescribed an antiviral drug."
Skin-Cancer,"The main cause of skin cancer is excessive exposure to the harmful ultraviolet radiation of the sun. The sun rays emits ultraviolet rays that are harmful to the body. They cause changes in the cell structure making them replicate in abnormal numbers. However, skin cancer does not present with immediate symptoms. It is usually evident after the age of 40 years when a person has been exposed to these harmful rays for a long time.","The earliest and most common symptom of skin cancer is a change in the colour of a particular area on the skin. Usually on a part of the skin frequently exposed to sunlight. This discolouration then spreads fast to other areas of the skin. There may also be a change in the shape of an already existing mole; in some cases, a new growth which looks like a mole may be seen. This mole-like growth may be ringed with a border. In some cases, the skin in the affected area may itch and appear bruised or bleed.The patient may also notice that the skin looks waxy. On touching, some lumps may be detected and the area around the lumps may become discoloured.","Surgery is the most common and the simplest way to treat skin cancer. The affected area along with some of the surrounding normal tissue is removed. If the cancer has spread to other areas, chemotherapy may be required. In this, the cancer cells are destroyed with the help of anti-cancer drugs. Other methods like cryosurgery are also used to treat skin cancer. The affected cells are killed by extreme temperature. The tissue falls off on its own after the treatment. Laser therapy and radiation are also used to kill the affected cells in a localised area. Treatment usually does not have many after-effects and skin cancer is the most treatable of all cancers if detected early. It usually does not spread into other areas, but even if it does, removal usually protects against recurrence."
Stomach-Cancer,Cancer that originates in the stomach is called stomach cancer. It can develop in any part of the stomach and from there spread to other parts of the body. Stomach cancer is one of the most quickly spreading cancers and may spread to other organs like the liver and lungs.,The early symptoms of the disease are very vague and so it may not be detected until the disease is advanced. The most common symptom may be an unexplained loss of weight. Other symptoms may include:,"Three methods of treatment are commonly used for treatment – Surgery, chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Surgery to remove the stomach, called gastrectomy, is usually done. In this procedure, either the whole stomach is removed (total gastrectomy), or the affected part is removed. If the whole stomach is removed, the doctor connects the food pipe directly to the small intestine and the patient has to consume a modified diet for the rest of the his life."
Schizophrenia,"Schizophrenia is a complex mental illness in which a person loses the ability to think, feel or behave normally. The patient seems to “live in a distorted world”, and is usually unaware of his illness. The disorder is more commonly seen in men than women. Men tend to show the symptoms in their late teens and early twenties whereas in women, the illness is manifested later during their thirties. Nearly 6-7 million Indians suffer from this disorder, which is now believed to be a brain disorder rather than a purely psychological illness.","Symptoms such as becoming socially withdrawn and unresponsive or changes in sleeping patterns can be mistaken for an adolescent ""phase"".","Treatment approach to schizophrenia is long term and multi-pronged. It comprises not only medical intervention, but also psychological, behavioural and social rehabilitation. Medical treatment – Antipsychotic medications like Clozapine, Risperidone and Olanzapine are prescribed in most cases of the disorder. The dosage of medication differs from one patient to another. Sometimes ECT (Electro Convulsive Therapy) or shock treatment is advised during a schizophrenic episode, but usually in conjunction with the administration of drugs. These drugs may induce some side effects like drowsiness, restlessness, muscle spasms, dry mouth or blurring of vision. Psychotherapy sessions are helpful in treatment along with drugs. During these sessions by a psychiatrist, the patient can talk about his feelings and experiences within his world. This can help him in understanding his own problems and also distinguish between the real and the distorted world. Family counselling sessions can also help the family deal better with the individual and his problem. Recently group therapy sessions have started in India, which enable an individual to interact with others and thus regain his confidence."
Syphilis,"Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease caused by Treponema pallidum. It is spread from one person to another through vaginal, anal or oral sex. The syphilis bacterium is passed through direct contact with a syphilis sore. Sores mainly occur on the external genitals, vagina, and anus or in the rectum. Sores also occur on the lips and in the mouth. An infected woman can also pass the disease on to her baby during pregnancy or childbirth. This kind of disease is called congenital syphilis.","The time between contacting the infection and the occurence of the first symptom can range from 10 to 90 days (average 21 days). If untreated, syphilis passes through three stages: primary, secondary, and latent or tertiary. The symptoms vary in the three stages:Primary symptoms: Painless ulcers or open sores on the genitals, rectum, mouth, or fingers Enlarged lymph nodes in the area near the sores Sores that heal in 4 to 8 weeks Secondary symptoms: Skin rash Enlargement of the lymph nodes Painless silvery ulcerations of the mucous membranes Headache Pain in the bones Loss of appetite Fever Fatigue Sore throat Weight loss The secondary stage may persist for a year. Sometimes people can develop meningitis, which is inflammation of the membrane that surrounds the brain and spinal cord.Tertiary symptoms: Tertiary stage syphilis can involve any organ of the body. When the brain is involved it is called neurosyphilis. This can cause many problems, including: Weakness or paralysis Loss of speech Deafness Blindness Mental disturbancesOther tertiary symptoms are: Tumours of the skin, bones, or liver Cardiovascular syphilis, which affects the aorta causing valve disease Central nervous system disorders Other symptoms that may be associated with syphilis are: Vaginal bleeding between periods Swallowing difficulty Nose bleed Mouth sores Groin lump Genital lesions in females In congenital syphilis, there may be no symptoms at all or very severe symptoms may be present. The usual symptoms of syphilis include: Enlarged lymph nodes Rash Enlarged liver and spleen Bone abnormalities Low blood cell count If left untreated, the late signs of congenital syphilis include bone malformations, malformed teeth, and eye and brain problems. It can even cause death.","The objective of the treatment is to eliminate the infection with antibiotic therapy. Penicillin is the best choice for all types of syphilis. A test dose should be given to check the hypersensitivity for penicillin. Oral tetracycline can be given to those sensitive to penicillin. A baby born with the disease needs daily penicillin treatment for 10 days. This treatment will kill the bacteria causing syphilis and prevent further damage, but it will not repair any damage already done. Persons who are under treatment for syphilis must abstain from sexual contact with new partners until the syphilis sores are completely healed."
Type-1-Diabetes,"Type 1, earlier known as insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) or juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus is a type of diabetes. People with this type of diabetes make little or no insulin in their body, and need regular insulin injections for survival and management of diabetes. It usually starts in childhood, but can occur at any age. ","Extreme thirst.Increased hunger (especially after eating)Dry mouth.Upset stomach and vomiting.Frequent urination.Unexplained weight loss, even though you eating and feel hungry.Fatigue.","Type 1 needs treatment with insulin injections to replace the insulin that is not produced in the body. There are several types of insulin available. The most commonly used are the genetically engineered that are similar to human insulin. The difference in the various types of insulin is the times at which they ""peak"" or are most effective. Insulin schedule depends upon the meal pattern of the individual. This is required to avoid low blood glucose levels, causing hypoglycaemia. Insulin is administered with a syringe, and newer devices such as insulin pens and insulin pumps. The latter devices control diabetes more efficiently."
Type-2-Diabetes,"Type 2 (DM2), earlier known as non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) or adult-onset diabetes. This is the most common form of diabetes, and is strongly associated with genetic tendency and obesity. The body produces normal or even high levels of insulin, but certain factors make its utilization ineffective (""insulin resistance""). Sedentary lifestyle, unhealthy dietary patterns, and the consequent obesity are common causes. It usually starts in adulthood, but is beginning to be seen in obese adolescents also. ",Increased thirst.Frequent urination.Increased hunger.Unintended weight loss.Fatigue.Blurred vision.Slow-healing sores.Frequent infections.,"Type 2 is initially treated with weight reduction, diet control and regular exercises. When these measures fail to control the blood sugar levels, oral medicines are used. Sulphonylureas are a group of drugs that stimulate the release of insulin from the pancreas. Metformin reduces insulin resistance, and the production of glucose by the liver. Thiazolidenediones also increase insulin efficiency and sensitivity. Acarbose delays the absorption of glucose by the intestines. When the action of oral drugs is insufficient, insulin injections are added. "
Throat-Cancer,"Cancer that develops in the larynx or the voice box or in any other part of the wind pipe is known as laryngeal or throat cancer. The throat region consists of two main tubes – the oesophagus (food pipe) and the wind pipe. The larynx is at the top of the wind pipe. It has a set of two vocal cords which produce sound when air passes through them. Since the setting of the vocal cords is different for each individual, the sound produced by them also varies, giving each person his or her own distinct voice.","Symptoms of throat cancer in the earliest phase resemble those of a sore throat. There may be hoarseness of voice with a feeling similar to that during a cold. There may also be slight pain in the throat with a persistent dry cough. In some cases, there may be coughing with blood in the sputum. When the tumour enlarges, the patient may have difficulty in swallowing and food may often go into the windpipe. Breathing may become laborious and may emit a high pitched sound. There may be bad breath, loss of weight and loss in appetite partly due to the inability to eat without choking.","Treatment depends upon the type of tumour and the extent of spread of the cancer. In most cases, radiation therapy or surgery are the common treatment methods. Surgery may involve total removal of the larynx (laryngectomy) or partial cutting away of the vocal cords. In both the procedures, a hole is made in the neck through which a tube is inserted into the windpipe to help the patient to breathe. This may be temporary or permanent. In cases where a laryngectomy is performed, the patient has to learn a new way to speak with the help of artificial devices and this requires extensive speech therapy. Radiation therapy is also a common method of treatment. Cancerous cells from a localised area are destroyed with the help of high powered rays. Radiation therapy is used in conjunction with surgery in cases where there is recurrence of the tumour after surgery. Chemotherapy may be done in case the cancer has spread to other areas of the body."
Thalassaemia,"It is a severe genetic blood disorder in which the red cells of the blood are abnormal and die fast leading to anaemia. Due to this the child may require frequent blood transfusions. Gradually the liver and spleen enlarge and the bones of the forehead and face become prominent. After several years, iron gets deposited in various organs, affecting their function and leading to death. Thalassaemia is essentially of two types:Thalassaemia major - is a serious disease in which the child is unable to maintain a satisfactory haemoglobin level. If left untreated the life span may be restricted to 3-5 years. The child requires frequent blood transfusions, which leads to accumulation of iron in the liver, heart and other organs. The only way to control this iron deposition is to use drugs called iron chelators. The treatment is long-drawn, expensive (Rs 5000-10000 per month) and emotionally taxing for the family. In addition, there are dangers of repeated blood transfusions that include transmission of hepatitis and HIV (which causes AIDS). Recently, bone marrow transplantation has been successfully performed in these children. This new modality has its limitations since it is expensive, it requires HLA matched donors, and carries a failure rate of 10-30%.Thalassaemia minor - is a carrier state in which one of a pair of chromosomes carries the affected gene. These individuals are essentially healthy and have a normal life span. They do not require blood transfusions, although they may be slightly anaemic especially during stress periods like pregnancy. These individuals are capable of passing the gene to the next generation.",Fatigue.Weakness.Pale or yellowish skin.Facial bone deformities.Slow growth.Abdominal swelling.Dark urine.,"Doctors use three standard treatments for moderate and severe forms of thalassemia. These treatments include blood transfusions, iron chelation (ke-LAY-shun) therapy, and folic acid supplements. Other treatments have been developed or are being tested, but they are used much less often."
Trachoma,"Trachoma is an infection of the eye which, if untreated, leads to blindness. It is caused by the organism Chlamydia trachomatis. The infection begins slowly as a mild conjunctivitis, an inflammation of the conjunctiva. The conjunctiva is the thin layer covering the front of the eye and the inside of the eyelids. The initial stage lasts several weeks and is followed by the chronic stage in which there is irritation and scarring of the eyelids. The scarring eventually causes the eyelids and lashes to turn inwards, rubbing and damaging the cornea, the central transparent potion of the eye. It is this corneal scarring which leads to severe vision loss and blindness.","The symptoms of trachoma include: Conjunctivitis Irritation, swelling and scarring of eyelids Pus-like discharge from the eye Swelling of lymph nodes just in front of the ears Cloudy cornea Loss of vision and blindness","The best time to treat trachoma is during childhood, before serious damage has begun. Early treatment result in full recovery and prevents loss of vision or blindness. Trachoma can be easily treated with antibiotic ointments like tetracycline or sulfonamides. Oral erythromycin also helps to treat the infection. The doctor may advise surgery to repair the damaged and scarred eyelids."
Tinnitus,"Tinnitus is often described as ringing in the ears. It may also be described as the sound of hissing, escaping air, running water, whistling, buzzing, or humming noise.",Tinnitus symptoms may include these types of phantom noises in your ears:Ringing.Buzzing.Roaring.Clicking.Hissing.Humming.,"Tinnitus usually lessens or goes away with time. If it persists, the following treatments are recommend - Medicines, including anti-anxiety drugs and antidepressants, which can help adjust to the irritation of the tinnitus. Medicines, including antihistamines, anticonvulsants, an anaesthetics. Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT), which combines low-level, steady background sounds with counselling. This combination helps grow unaware of the sounds of tinnitus. Hearing aids for hearing loss Biofeedback, which is a relaxation technique that teaches one to control certain body functions such as pulse, muscle tension, and brain wave activity."
Transient-ischaemic-attack,"A transient ischaemic attack is a ""mini-stroke"" caused by temporary disturbance of blood supply to an area of the brain, resulting in a sudden, brief decrease in brain function. It lasts less than 24 hours, usually less than one hour.","Symptoms of TIA are the same as those that occur in stroke and include the sudden development of: numbness and tingling weakness, heavy feeling of extremities speech difficulty (garbled speech or slurred speech) decreased, double or loss of vision, loss of balance lack of coordination gait changes, staggering falling (caused by weakness in the legs) Additional symptoms that may be associated with this disease: facial paralysis eye pain confusionThe symptoms begin suddenly, last only a short time (from a few minutes to 24 hours) and disappear completely. Symptoms may occur again at a later time. Specific symptoms vary depending on the location, the degree of vessel involvement, and the extent of collateral circulation.","The goal of treatment is to improve the arterial blood supply to the brain and prevent the development of a stroke. Treatment of recent TIA (within the prior 48 hours) usually requires admission to the hospital for evaluation of the specific cause and determination of long-term treatment. Underlying disorders should be treated appropriately, including such disorders as hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, arthritis, and blood disorders. Smoking should be stopped.Treatment of symptoms of blood disorders (such as erythrocytosis, thrombocytosis, or polycythaemia vera, which include an increase in the number of some types of blood cells) may include phlebotomy, hydration, and treatment of the underlying blood disorder. Antihypertensive medications may be used to control high blood pressure. Medications to lower cholesterol may be useful in reducing high blood cholesterol levels.Platelet inhibitors and anticoagulant medications (blood thinners) may be used to reduce clotting. Aspirin is the most commonly used medication; others include dipyridamole, clopidogrel, Aggrenox or heparin, coumadin, or other similar medications. Treatment may be continued for an indefinite time period.A reduced amount of sodium in the diet to help control high blood pressure; diet for diabetics; reduced dietary fat, or other dietary changes may be recommended.Surgery (carotid endarterectomy, removal of atherosclerotic plaque from the carotid arteries in the neck) may be appropriate for some people, particularly those with carotid artery stenosis of greater than 70% of the artery and without coexisting terminal disease or dementia."
Uterine-Cancer,"The uterus or the womb is the organ in which the foetus grows during pregnancy. The two most cancer prone parts of the uterus are the endometrium - the inner lining of the uterus, and the cervix - the birth canal. When the cancer begins in the endometrium first, it is called endometrial cancer, and when it starts in the cervix, it is called cervical cancer. In the later stages, endometrial cancer involving the cervix presents as cervical cancer.Uterine cancer is the second most common cancer in women after breast cancer. It is most common between the ages of 45-50 years, and the risk increases with age. Low socio-economic group, poor dental hygiene, active sexual life at an early age, multiple sexual partners, male sexual partner with multiple partners and smoking are the risk factors.","There may be slight pain and heaviness in the lower abdomen. Bleeding after sexual intercourse, bleeding between periods and foul smelling discharge are some of the earliest complaints. Other symptoms when the disease is advanced include loss of weight, loss of appetite, general fatigue and tiredness.","The treatment modality varies depending upon the stage of the cancer. The most common mode of treatment for uterine cancer is the removal of the uterus. This procedure called hysterectomy is a surgical procedure performed under general anaesthesia. Besides the uterus, the cervix, upper portion of the vagina, both fallopian tubes and ovaries may also be removed. The patient needs to be hospitalised for 7-10 days and needs special care for recovery.In some cases, radiation therapy is used to destroy the cancerous cells. Chemotherapy may be used if the cancer has spread to other areas of the body. For women who have recurrent uterine cancer, hormone therapy may be used. In this therapy, drugs containing the hormone progesterone are given orally. This hormone is an antidote to oestrogen and helps to control the growth of cancer cells."
Uterine-fibroids,"Uterine fibroids are slow growing tumours made out of muscle and fibrous tissue attached to the wall of the uterus. They appear and grow in women during their childbearing years. The tumour may vary in size from a pinhead to the tip of a grapefruit. When numerous fibroids are present, the size of the uterus may increase to any size and may mimic a pregnancy. Most fibroids are non-cancerous.","Often there are no symptoms. Large fibroids may cause abdominal distension or a feeling of weight in the lower abdomen. They may exert pressure on the bladder, causing increased urination, or on other organs located in the lower abdomen, which may cause discomfort. The most frequent symptom is heavy bleeding during the menstrual period that may occur when the fibroid is growing near or towards the uterine cavity. Sometimes, fibroids may cause infertility, miscarriage, or severe pain.","A majority of fibroids require no treatment. However treatment becomes necessary if there is excessive bleeding during menstruation, the tumour keeps growing or if there are other symptoms. In women older than 35years or with completed family are treated by a hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) rather than myomectomy (removal of the fibroids), to minimize the chances of recurrence. Myomectomy is generally done in cases where the patient wishes to preserve her fertility. Medicines like danazol, GnRH analogues and progesterone derivatives, to shrink the fibroid, may be given for 2-3 months before surgery.In the present times, laparoscopic removal of the uterus with fibroids or removal of the fibroid only are also performed reqularily with excellent results. The advantage over the routine open procedures is a quicker recovery, shorter hospital stay and less complications. The only disadvantage may be a longer anasthesia duration."
Urinary-tract-infections,The urinary tract can be infected by bacteria in two ways: By bacteria entering the kidneys from the blood and travelling down. By bacteria entering the urethra and travelling upward.,Frequent urination with only small amounts of urine. Burning or pain when urinating. Urine that smells bad or is cloudy or at times contains blood. Diarrhoea and vomiting. Lower back pain. Fever with chills and shivering.,"A sample of the urine is taken and analysed for the number of bacteria and white blood cells in it. A fresh sample of urine is taken. Usually the urine is collected in mid-stream and the container must not touch the genital organs. The sample is analysed soon after collection. A UTI infection is usually treated by the use of antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and certain penicillins such as amoxicillin. The urine culture can be repeated after 3-5 days to make sure that the antibiotic is working. The medicines should not be stopped till the infection is cleared completely."
Vitiligo,"Vitiligo, also known as leucoderma, is a relatively common skin disorder, in which white spots or patches appear on the skin. These spots are caused by destruction or weakening of the pigment cells in those areas, resulting in the pigment being destroyed or no longer produced. In most cases, vitiligo is believed to be an autoimmune-related disorder. In vitiligo, only the colour of the skin is affected but texture and other skin qualities remain normal.","People who develop vitiligo usually first notice white patches or spots (depigmentation) on their skin. The skin remains of normal texture, and there is usually no itching or other symptoms. These patches are more obvious in sun-exposed areas, including the hands, feet, arms, legs face, and lips. Other common areas for white patches to appear are the armpits and groin and around the mouth, eyes, nostrils, navel, and genitals. Vitiligo generally appears in one of three patterns. In one pattern (focal pattern), the depigmentation is limited to one or only a few areas. Some people develop depigmented patches on only one side of their bodies (segmental vitiligo). But for most people who have vitiligo, depigmentation occurs on different parts of the body (generalised vitiligo), often similar on each side of the body. In addition to white patches on the skin, some people with vitiligo may experience white hair growing in on the scalp, eyelashes, eyebrows, and beard. In extremely rare cases, vitiligo can affect eye color or the pigment of the retina.","Today, there is more research and more treatments options available than ever before. In addition to the traditional therapies such as the PUVA system and steroid creams, new technologies have been developed, including narrow-band UVB, Pseudocatalase cream, excimer lasers, skin grafting and pigment transplantation, topical psoralens, and potentially, the use of immunomodulators. Depending on the number, size and location of the white patches, one may decide to seek medical treatment. Medical treatments for vitiligo aim to even out skin tone, either by restoring colour (pigment) or destroying the remaining colour. Depending on the type of therapy, treatment for vitiligo may take from six to 18 months. Medical treatment choices are based on the number of white patches and how widespread they are. Each person responds differently to treatment. There is no one treatment that works for everyone. Different therapies work better for different people. While one person may respond extremely well to PUVA, another may respond better to narrow band UVB or immunomodulators. For this reason, many vitiligo experts will try different therapies on a patient until they find what works best for that person.Lifestyle and home remediesCertain self-care tactics may help care for the skin and improve its appearance: Protect the skin - If one has vitiligo, then he/she should use sunscreen to protect the skin from the sun's harmful rays. Sunscreen helps protect the skin from sunburn and long-term damage. Sunscreen also minimises tanning, which makes the contrast between normal and depigmented skin less noticeable. Conceal imperfections. Cosmetics may lessen the appearance of the white patches and help feel better about oneself. These cosmetic products may be particularly effective if vitiligo is limited to only certain areas of the body."
Varicose-veins,"Varicose veins is a condition in which the veins get enlarged and become visible. Veins contain valves, which prevent the blood from flowing backward. When these valves do not function properly, blood either flows backward or starts collecting in the veins, instead of returning to the heart. Blood also collects in the veins if there is pressure on the veins from outside. These enlarged veins, due to accumulation of blood, are called varicose veins.Women are more likely to have varicose veins, especially during pregnancy. In some cases, these veins may rupture and cause ulcers and blood clots.Varicose veins mostly occur on the thigh or calf, where they are close enough to the skin to be seen. However, they can occur in other parts of the body as well.","Varicose veins can be seen near the skin as swollen, enlarged, tortuous, bluish veins that are most noticeable while standing. Other symptoms include: Pain in the legs Muscle cramps of the legs Swelling of ankles Discoloured brown skin at the ankles Skin ulcers on the legs or above the ankles","Treatment may not be required unless the condition is painful or is causing skin ulcers. Frequent rest periods and raising the legs whenever possible to increase the blood flow, avoiding prolonged standing or sitting, and regular exercise help with leg swelling and pain. Compression bandages and stockings are available that help minimize the symptoms.If symptoms are severe or a person finds the appearance of the veins unacceptable, varicose veins surgery may be an option. In this the dilated, tortuous veins are removed after tying their connection with the normal veins. In the most common operation the larger veins in the thigh are removed by the use of a 'stripper' device inserted into the veins. The many smaller veins in the leg below the knee are removed through a number of very small cuts, which leave only tiny wounds.There is a new device available which a surgeon can insert into the veins, which obliterates the veins from the inside; they then do not need to be removed. The results of this new treatment are being studied, and it looks very promising. At the moment this treatment is only available in few hospitals in some countries. If the main problem is the formation of leg ulcers, then skilful application of pressure bandages will almost always lead to complete healing, though this takes a long time."
Varicocoele,"Varicocoele is a swelling in the scrotum (the sac containing the testes), which occurs when the veins draining blood from the testes get enlarged. It is most common on the left side due to the arrangement of the veins on that side.",Swelling of the scrotum accompanied by pain. Infertility (low sperm count). Visible and enlarged scrotum hangs lower on the enlarged side.,"Varicocoeles may be treated by the use of a scrotal support. However, if pain continues or if infertility results from a backup of blood in the veins, surgical ligation (tying off) of the varicocoele may become necessary.Surgery (Varicocoelectomy) is performed using general or spinal anaesthesia. Ice-packs can be kept for the first 24 hours after surgery to reduce swelling. Complications associated with any surgical procedure may occur like haematoma (blood clot formation), abscess or injury to the scrotal structures."
Warts,"Warts are skin growths caused by a viral infection in the top layer of the skin. Viruses that cause warts are called human papillomavirus (HPV).They may occur anywhere on the body but are frequently seen on the hands, feet and face that are areas of frequent contact. The typical wart is a rough, round or oval lump on the skin that may be lighter or darker than the normal skin colour and, rarely, black. Women and children are more likely to have warts.There are several kinds of warts. They are categorized depending upon their appearance and area of growth: Common warts Foot or Plantar warts Flat warts Genital warts Cervical warts Laryngeal warts Common warts – usually grow on the fingers, around the nails and on the back of the hands. These are more common where the skin has been broken, for example where fingernails are bitten or hangnails picked. These are also called “seed” warts because the blood vessels supplying blood to the wart produce black dots that looks like seeds. Common warts cause no discomfort unless they bleed. Foot or Plantar warts – are usually seen on the soles (plantar area) of the feet and when found in clusters, are known as mosaic warts. They are generally flat because the pressure of walking flattens them and pushes them back into the skin. They may also have black spots like common warts. Plantar warts can be painful and give a feel of a stone in the shoe. Large numbers of these warts on the soles of the feet makes walking and running difficult. Diabetics and athletes have a high incidence of plantar warts. Flat warts – are smaller and smoother than other warts and tend to grow in large numbers, usually 20 to 100 at any one time. They can occur anywhere, but in children they are most common on the face. In adults they are often found in the beard area in men and on the legs in women. Genital warts – occur in the genital areas such as vagina, anus, penis and scrotum. They may be raised or flat, single or multiple and clumped together forming a cauliflower like shape. Genital warts are spread usually by skin-to-skin contact during sexual intercourse. Rarely they cause itching or bleeding.","Warts can be found on the hands, feet, forearms, and face and may range in size from a pinhead to a small bean. They can also occur on the voice box or the larynx and cause hoarseness. They generally do not cause pain except in case of foot warts. Warts may cause itching and bleeding.","In most of the cases, warts may disappear without treatment over a period of time. Warts generally disappear much easily and quickly in children. However, warts that are painful and rapidly multiplying need treatment. Treatment depends on the age of the patient and the type of the wart. Applying salicylic acid gel, solution or plaster can treat young children for warts at home. For adults, cryotherapy (freezing) is generally preferred. This treatment is not too painful and rarely results in scarring. Electro surgery (burning) is another good alternative. Surgery may be preferred for cosmetic purposes. The doctor uses scalpels to cut out the wart and surrounding tissue. Laser surgery can be used to treat resistant warts that have not responded to other therapies."
